Title: Diagnostic_Field_Selection_Fig2-4_redblue_revised (1)

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.10846v2

Published Time: Fri, 14 Aug 2026 01:00:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

1

# An Information Theory Analysis of Whole Slide Image Pathology AI and Diagnostic Field Selection AI Under Limited Resources 

Tatsuaki Tsuruyama, M.D., Ph.D. Department of Drug Discovery Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan Running title: Mutual Information–Dependent Threshold Responses †Correspondence: (email: tsuruyam@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp) 

Abstract 

A key issue in using AI for pathology diagnosis is what image information should be given to the AI and how limited analysis resources should be used. This study compares two ways of processing different types of images under limited resources. The first is WSI-AI, in which AI automatically compresses information from the whole slide image (WSI). The second is Diagnostic Field Selection (DFS)-AI in which an expert first selects several regions, magnifications, and comparisons needed for diagnosis, and the AI then analyzes those selected fields. To compare these two types, we built three image models: a rarely localized lesion, lesion detection in a nonuniform background, and a spatially continuous lesion. As a result, WSI-AI was better when a coarse view did not give enough information about lesion location in advance, as may occur with very small tumor foci in lymph nodes. In contrast, when a low-cost coarse view provided useful location information, DFS-AI was better in an intermediate range of limited resources. When searching for a specific object such as infectious organism in a nonuniform background, the relative value of DFS-AI increased. For spatially continuous lesions, WSI-AI found the presence of a lesion more easily as the lesion became larger. However, for complete characterization of the entire lesion, DFS-AI could be better because it used the continuous structure to select fields for analysis. In conclusion, both relative performance changes in a systematic way with location information from the coarse view, background heterogeneity, local context, and the spatial structure of the lesion. A practical strategy under limited resources is for physicians to choose between WSI-AI and DIS-AI according to the information structure of the diagnostic task. Keywords: Whole Slide Image, Diagnostic Field Selection, information bottleneck, finite representation, computational pathology, human guided AI Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 2

Introduction 

Artificial intelligence (AI) in digital pathology has developed from multiple instance learning (MIL) to long sequence Transformers and whole slide foundation models. These methods have greatly improved the ability to extract diagnostic information from an entire whole slide image (WSI) [5–8]. However, having access to the whole WSI is not the same as keeping all information needed for diagnosis in the final representation when resources are limited. In actual WSI-AI systems, the WSI is divided into many tiles. Each tile is compressed into an embedding. The embeddings are then selected and combined into a representation of limited length. Information needed for pathology diagnosis is also not spread evenly across a WSI. Histologic type is judged from a combination of cell morphology and tissue architecture. Invasion is judged from the relationship between the lesion and surrounding tissue. Inflammation is judged from a combination of cell type, tissue compartment, distribution, tissue injury, and time phase. These tasks often require observation of several fields at several magnifications. The observer may first understand the overall architecture at low magnification, then select borders or tissue compartments at medium magnification, and finally confirm cell features at high magnification. In contrast, when the main task is simply to find a rare target, such as a small lymph node metastasis, broad coverage is important. For pathology AI, the important question is therefore not only which AI architecture to use. It is also what image information should be given to the AI when analysis resources are limited. This study compares WSI-AI and DFS-AI as two ways of providing image information to AI. In WSI-AI, the whole WSI is the target of analysis. The AI selects the image information to analyze, extracts features, compresses the information, and combines it. In the limited resource models used here, WSI-AI is represented as a method that does not use expert field selection in advance and instead distributes the available fine observation resources across a whole slide search. In DFS-AI, an expert selects the image information needed for diagnosis as Diagnostic Fields, and the AI analyzes the selected information. A Diagnostic Field is not a single rectangular ROI. It can include several regions, magnifications, and comparison relationships chosen for the diagnostic purpose. For example, diagnosis of histologic type may require low magnification tissue architecture and high magnification cell features. Evaluation of invasion may require the lesion, the invasive front, and surrounding tissue. Evaluation of inflammation may require the relationship between cell features, tissue compartments, and distribution. We do not limit the source of information used to select a Diagnostic Field. DFS-AI includes not only selection based on the expert's own overall observation, but also cases in which the expert uses candidate regions suggested by WSI-AI and makes the final choice of fields for analysis. We compare the two methods and examine, from an information science view, how their relative advantages change with resource conditions and with the information structure of pathology images. This study does not propose a new AI architecture. The expert is placed outside both methods as the final diagnostician. AI output is not treated as proof of a diagnosis or as an independent ground truth. It is treated as diagnostic support information that must be combined with morphology, tissue architecture, immunohistochemistry, molecular tests, other specimens, clinical information, and other evidence. 

Results With limited capacity, regions with low relevance can compete for information capacity 

Let 𝑆 be the image structures needed for diagnosis. Let 𝑁 be the remaining image information that provides little additional information for the diagnostic task once 𝑆 is known. We write the WSI as 𝑋 = (𝑆, 𝑁) . In an idealized case, assume 

𝐼(𝑌; 𝑁 ∣ 𝑆) = 0 Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 3

This means that once 𝑆 is known, adding 𝑁 does not reduce uncertainty about diagnosis 𝑌 . Then 

𝐼(𝑌; 𝑆, 𝑁) = 𝐼(𝑌; 𝑆) 

Thus, even though 𝑁 contains image information, it adds no further diagnostic information. Let 𝑍 ! be the finite length internal representation of WSI-AI and 𝑍 " the internal representation of DFS-AI. Let 𝐶 be the upper limit on the amount of information that either representation can retain. Let the amount of low relevance information that remains in the WSI-AI representation be 

𝑐 # = 𝐼(𝑁; 𝑍 ! ∣ 𝑆) 

With this definition, the restricted model gives the following upper bound on the diagnostic information that WSI-AI can retain: 

𝐼(𝑌; 𝑍 !) ≤ min{𝐼(𝑌; 𝑆), 𝐶 − 𝑐 #}

This gives the upper bound above. As 𝑐 # becomes larger, less of the finite capacity 𝐶 can be used for diagnostically relevant structure. Here, 𝑐 # is not the number of bytes in GPU memory. It is a theoretical quantity that represents the amount of low relevance variation remaining in the finite representation. 

Core condition for an advantage of DFS 

Let the diagnostic information that could ideally be retained under capacity 𝐶 be 

𝐼 $(𝐶) = min{𝐼(𝑌; 𝑆), 𝐶} 

We define the total loss as the information lost because the expert did not select a needed field, because a needed magnification or comparison was missing, or because the selected fields were compressed into a finite representation. 

𝑑 "(𝐶) = 𝐼 $(𝐶) − 𝐼(𝑌; 𝑍 ")

We define this quantity as above. In contrast, let the loss caused by the WSI-AI upper bound above be 

𝑔 !(𝐶) = 𝐼 $(𝐶) − min{𝐼(𝑌; 𝑆), 𝐶 − 𝑐 #}

With these definitions, 

𝑑 "(𝐶) < 𝑔 !(𝐶) 

If this condition holds, it is sufficient for the DFS-AI internal representation to retain more diagnostic information than the WSI-AI representation. In the range where diagnostically relevant information alone uses all of capacity 𝐶 , this condition becomes 

𝑑 "(𝐶) < 𝑐 #

This condition has a simple meaning. DFS-AI can be better if the diagnostic information lost through expert field selection is smaller than the diagnostic information lost in WSI-AI because low relevance regions compete for storage, selection, and aggregation. In contrast, WSI-AI is better when the expert misses too much important information during selection. 

The advantage of DFS lies in relationships across several fields, not in a single ROI 

Let the two diagnostic fields be 𝐴 and 𝐵 . For example, let 𝐴 be low magnification tissue architecture and 𝐵 be high magnification cell features. If 

𝐼(𝑌; 𝐵 ∣ 𝐴) > 0 

and 

𝐼(𝑌; 𝐴 ∣ 𝐵) > 0 Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 4

then one field alone cannot fully replace the diagnostic information in the other. DFS should therefore not be designed as a single ROI cropped only from the lesion. It should select several fields while preserving the relationships needed for diagnosis. 

1 Model I: Limited resource search for a single rare lesion with WSI and DFS 

Model I first leaves aside the morphologic complexity of pathology images and isolates only the difference in limited observation resources and observation strategy. We place M observation points on a square grid. Only one point is a lesion, and all other points are normal. In the figures, the lesion is always red and normal points are always blue. The meaning and color of the lesion do not change. Only its coordinate L is moved across all grid points. In the representative calculations below, we use a 7×7 grid, so M = 49, and assume that lesion location follows the uniform distribution 𝑃(𝐿 = 𝑖) = 1/𝑀 . Therefore, no coordinate has a diagnostic prior. Figure 1. Observation strategies in Model I. A: Ground truth with one lesion point (red) and normal points (blue). B: WSI-AI traces the whole area with fine observation from the start. C: DFS-AI first makes a low cost coarse view of the whole area, ranks candidate points by the coarse score, and then performs fine analysis only on selected points. In the calculation, the red point is moved through all 49 coordinates. Let the total observation budget be B, and let the cost of fine observation at one point be 𝑐 %. Model I assumes that a lesion is detected perfectly if it is present at a point that receives fine observation. We do not include error from the fine detector itself. WSI-AI does not perform coarse selection in advance. It starts with fine observation and applies it point by point. The number of points that can be observed, 𝑘 !, and the detection probability 𝑃 !&' 

averaged over all lesion locations are 

𝑘 ! = min F𝑀, floor K 𝐵 𝑐 %

LM , 𝑃 ()* = 𝑘 !

𝑀 .

With a fixed trace order, success or failure at each coordinate depends on the order. However, if the lesion is moved uniformly across all M coordinates and the result is averaged, the detection probability is 𝑘 !/M. It does not depend on the coordinate labels or on the geometric way the trace is drawn. 

1.1. DFS-AI: Coarse localization and focused fine analysis 

In DFS-AI, the expert first views all M points coarsely at low cost. Let the coarse observation cost per point be 

𝑐 . The fixed cost of the whole coarse view is 𝑀𝑐 . After the coarse view, the number of points that can receive fine analysis, 𝑚 ", is 

𝑚 " = min F𝑀, max S0, floor K 𝐵 − 𝑀𝑐 +

𝑐 %

LTM. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

5

We represent how much ranking information the coarse view has about lesion location by the separation δ between the coarse scores of normal and lesion points. Let the score of a normal point be 𝑍 $ and the score of the lesion point be 𝑍 ,, with 

𝑍 $ ∼ 𝒩(0,1), 𝑍 , ∼ 𝒩(𝛿, 1). 

When δ = 0, the coarse view contains no information about lesion location. As δ increases, the coarse view can rank lesion candidates closer to the top. DFS-AI selects the top 𝑚 " points by coarse score and performs fine analysis only on those points. The process called coarse overview → focus here is not a third method. It is the observation process of DFS itself. 

1.2. Exact detection probability for DFS 

Suppose the coarse score of the lesion point is z. The probability that one normal point has a score higher than z is 1−Φ(z), where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function and φ is its density. For the lesion point to be among the top 𝑚 " points, at most 𝑚 "−1 of the M−1 normal points may have scores above z. Therefore, the coordinate averaged detection probability of DFS can be calculated directly by the following integral, without Monte Carlo simulation. 

𝑃 -.) = X 𝜙 

> /0/

(𝑧 − 𝛿) [ \ 𝑀 − 1 𝑗 ^

> 1!0, 2 4 $

[1 − 𝛷(𝑧)] 2[𝛷(𝑧)] 50,02 𝑑𝑧. 

This equation directly shows the tradeoff between the value of ranking information from the coarse view and the fixed cost M c needed to obtain that information. DFS is better than WSI when 𝑃 "6& > 𝑃 !&' . The boundary can be defined by the critical discriminability 𝛿 ∗(𝐵, 𝑐, 𝑀) that satisfies 𝑃 "6& = 𝑃 !&' .

1.3. Representative calculation 

Below, M = 49, the fine observation cost is 𝑐 % = 1, and the coarse view cost is c = 0.05. The fixed cost for DFS to view all 49 points coarsely is 2.45. We use δ = 0.5 as a representative coarse view discriminability. At B = 15, WSI-AI can observe 15 points finely, so 𝑃 !&' = 15/49 = 0.3061. DFS-AI can observe 12 points finely after the coarse view, and the exact integral gives 𝑃 "6& = 0.4207. Thus, under this condition, the absolute advantage of DFS is 0.1146. At B = 15, the critical coarse view discriminability at which the two methods are equal is δ* = 0.1873. Even fairly weak coarse localization information can therefore repay the cost of the coarse view by focusing fine observation under intermediate limited resources. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 6

Figure 2. Total observation budget B and detection probability in Model I. δ = 0.5 and c = 0.05. At very low resources, the fixed cost of the coarse view dominates and WSI is better. At intermediate resources, DFS is better. At high resources, where almost the whole area can be observed finely, WSI becomes better again. 

1.4. Resource dependent phase transition 

The main result of Model I is that neither method is always best. The better method changes with the total resources and the amount of information available from the coarse view. When δ = 0, the coarse view gives no information at all about lesion location, and there is no resource range in which DFS is better. When δ = 0.2, DFS is better only for B = 14–38. When δ = 0.5, DFS is better for B = 5–47. When δ = 1.0 or δ = 2.0, the range expands to B = 4–48. Thus, as the coarse view provides more information, the limited resource range in which DFS is best becomes wider. Low resources: WSI → Intermediate resources: DFS → High resources: WSI At low resources, DFS has a largely fixed cost for the coarse view of the whole area. Too few resources remain for fine observation, so WSI is better. In the practical intermediate resource range, the value of using ranking information from the coarse view to focus fine observation on likely candidates is greater than the fixed cost, so DFS is better. In an ideal high resource range, WSI can observe almost every point finely. The value of saving resources by selection then disappears, and WSI, which has no coarse view cost, becomes better again. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 7
> Figure 3. Advantage of DFS as a function of total observation budget B and coarse-view discriminability δ. Color represents ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI): red indicates ΔP > 0 (DFS advantage), blue indicates ΔP < 0 (WSI advantage), and the black zero contour is the boundary between the two methods.

1.5. Sensitivity to coarse view cost 

The gain of DFS does not assume that the coarse view is free. As c increases, the fixed cost M c increases. The number of points 𝑚 " that can receive fine analysis at the same B therefore decreases, and the range in which DFS is better becomes smaller. Thus, the advantage of DFS does not come only from the fact that an expert selects the fields. It depends on the tradeoff between cost and information: how much location information a low-cost coarse observation can provide. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 8
> Figure 4. Sensitivity to coarse-view cost c when δ is fixed at 0.5. Color represents ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI): red indicates a DFS advantage and blue indicates a WSI advantage. As the coarse-view cost increases, the range in which DFS is better becomes smaller.

4.7 Robustness to coordinates and conclusion of Model I 

Because lesion location L is moved uniformly across all M coordinates in this model, the final result does not depend on where the red point is drawn in the figure. In DFS, the coordinates are exchangeable, so under the same δ the lesion has the same rank distribution at every coordinate. With the fixed WSI trace, the time at which each coordinate is found depends on the order. However, the mean success rate across all coordinates is 𝑘 !/𝑀 ,which is unchanged by relabeling the coordinates. The advantage shown by Model I therefore comes from the rule used to distribute limited resources, not from a particular choice of location. These results show that even in the smallest problem of one rare lesion, the best observation strategy changes with the amount of resources and the information available from the coarse view. WSI is better when the coarse view has no useful information or is too costly. DFS is better in an intermediate range of limited resources when a low-cost coarse view gives enough ranking information about lesion location and fine observation of the whole area is not possible. When resources become large enough for WSI to observe the whole area finely, WSI becomes better again. The advantage of DFS is therefore not simply that it observes a smaller area. Its advantage is that location information from the coarse observation can be used to move expensive fine analysis resources toward more useful locations. Model I is a minimal model with perfectly fine observation, one lesion, and a uniform background. False positives, multiple lesions, background heterogeneity, and structural dependence are introduced in later models. 

2 Model II: Detection of an infectious organism in a nonuniform background 

In real pathology tissue, the background is not always uniform. Normal tissue itself can vary in color, cell density, structure, and other features. Some regions may therefore have visual features like a lesion. In such a setting, it is not enough to search only for an area that stands out. The observer must separate changes in the background from findings that are specific to the lesion. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 9

Model II considers a search mainly for an infectious organism. The task is to detect a red signal from the organism in an environment where background color varies by location. When background heterogeneity is small, the organism can be recognized easily from its absolute color feature alone. As background heterogeneity increases, however, noninfected regions can also show high redness and act as distractors. In DFS, we assume that the observer can choose candidates by comparing the target with the surrounding tissue, not only by looking at the redness of the target itself. Referring to the local background can remove part of the color variation caused by the background and can help isolate the signal specific to the organism. WSI-AI is modeled as a strategy that directly performs detailed observation of many fields under a limited observation budget. The purpose of Model II is to examine numerically how the relative detection performance of DFS and WSI-AI changes as background heterogeneity increases. 

2.1 Modeling the background and infectious organism 

The observation area contains M candidate points, and one of them contains the infectious organism. Figure 5: A: Ground truth. Each point has a different color, representing background heterogeneity. Only one point is a red target representing the lesion. B: Search by WSI. The total observation resources are distributed across the whole area, and the fields are scanned one by one with fine observation. This gives broad coverage, but resources are also spent on nonlesion points that look like the lesion, or mimics. C: Search by DFS. A coarse view is first used to see the whole area. Points that are considered lesion candidates are then selected for focused observation. Circled points are targets of detailed observation. The diagram shows how DFS can use local background context to narrow the candidates and find the red lesion more efficiently in a nonuniform background. Let 𝑖 denote a candidate point. Set 𝐼 8 = 1 when candidate point i contains the infectious organism and 𝐼 8 = 0 when it does not. Define the latent redness at the center of each candidate point, 𝑥 8, as 

𝑥 8 = 𝑏 8 + 𝜂 8 + 𝛥𝐼 8

Here, 𝑏 8 is the background color component at candidate point i, 𝜂 8 is a small color variation specific to that site, and Δ is the size of the red signal specific to the infectious organism. The background component and the site-specific variation are modeled as 

𝑏 8 𝑁(0, 𝜎 9²), 𝜂 8 𝑁i0, 𝜎 :²j 

Here, 𝜎 9 represents background heterogeneity. When 𝜎 9 is small, the background colors are fairly uniform. As 

𝜎 9 increases, color differences among candidate points become larger. Even in a noninfected region, a large positive value of 𝑏 8 can produce a red color similar to that of the infectious organism. We treat such a region as a distractor. An increase in 𝜎 9 therefore does not simply mean more observation noise. It means that the sample itself contains more candidates that resemble the infectious organism. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

10 

2.2 Introducing the local background 

In real tissue observation, the color of a region is often judged not only by its absolute value but also by its difference from surrounding tissue. Model II therefore introduces a local background component 𝑏 8; around candidate point 𝑖 . We assume that the central background 𝑏 8 and the local background 𝑏 8; are correlated. Let this correlation be 𝜌 ;, with 0< 𝜌 ;<1. More specifically, using independent standard normal variables 𝑢 8 and 𝑣 8,

𝑏 8 = 𝜎 9𝑢 8

𝑏 8; = 𝜎 9𝜌 ;𝑢 8 + √(1 − 𝜌 ;²)𝑣 8

With these definitions, 𝑏 8 and 𝑏 8; have the same variance 𝜎 9², and their correlation coefficient is 𝜌 ;. When 𝜌 ; is close to 1, the background color at the center and around it is very similar. As 𝜌 ; becomes smaller, the local background itself becomes more variable, and it becomes harder to estimate the central background from the surrounding area. DFS evaluates how likely a candidate is to contain the organism by using the difference between the center and the local background, rather than the absolute redness of the candidate. The DFS score in fine observation is 

𝑧 8(",%) = i𝑥 8 + 𝜀 8%j − p𝑏 8;𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 + 𝜀 8(;?+@;,%) t

This local background subtraction cancels part of the background color component shared by the center and the surrounding area. However, because 𝜌 ;<1, background variation is not removed completely. In contrast, the WSI-AI comparator in Model II does not explicitly correct for the local background. It uses the absolute redness of candidates seen with fine observation as the basic information for identifying the organism: 

𝑧 8!&' = 𝑥 8 + 𝜀 8%

This comparison does not mean that WSI-AI in general cannot use local context. It is a minimal model designed to separate two strategies under limited resources: whole area search using absolute features, and selective search using local context. 

2.3 Dilution of the target signal in coarse observation 

When the target organism is small, its red signal may be averaged with the surrounding background at low magnification or in a coarse observation. It may therefore appear weaker than in fine observation. We set the organism signal in coarse observation to 𝜅𝛥 , where 0 < 𝜅 < 1 . Here, 𝜅 represents the visibility of the organism signal during coarse observation. We define the latent central value during coarse observation as 

𝑥 8+ = 𝑏 8 + 𝜂 8 + 𝜅𝛥𝐼 8

Using this latent value, we define the DFS coarse score, including error in estimating the local background, as 

𝑧 8+ = (𝑥 8+ + 𝜀 8+) − p𝑏 8;𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 + 𝜀 8(;?+@;,+) t

With this setting, when the background is uniform and the organism is easy to identify, adding a coarse observation in DFS does not necessarily provide much extra information. In contrast, when background heterogeneity increases and more distractors appear, candidate selection based on the difference from the local background becomes more valuable. 

2.4 Observation strategies of DFS and WSI-AI 

Let B be the total observation budget, c the cost of coarse observation per candidate point, and 𝑐 % the cost of fine observation. In DFS, all M candidate points first receive coarse observation. The fixed cost of this stage is M c. The number of candidate points that can receive fine observation with the remaining budget, 𝑚 ", is 

𝑚 " = 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑟 p(𝐵 − 𝑀𝑐)/𝑐 %tInformation Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 11

DFS ranks the candidate points by the coarse score 𝑧 8+ and performs fine observation only on the top 𝑚 " points. It then chooses the candidate that looks most like the organism using the score after local background subtraction in fine observation. WSI-AI does not perform coarse observation and uses the total observation budget directly for fine observation. Therefore, the number of candidate points that can receive detailed observation, 𝑚 !, is 

𝑚 ! = 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑟i𝐵/𝑐 %j

WSI-AI performs fine observation on 𝑚 ! points in an order that does not depend on location. Because the organism location is placed uniformly over all candidate points and the results are averaged, this is equivalent to uniformly sampling 𝑚 ! points. Under the same budget B, 𝑚 " < 𝑚 ! . DFS therefore observes fewer candidate points in detail than WSI-AI. In return, coarse observation and local background information may allow DFS to focus fine observation on candidates that are more likely to contain the organism. The comparison in Model II is therefore a tradeoff between the number of fields that can be observed and the contextual information available for choosing candidates. 

2.5 Definition of successful detection 

In each trial, detection is counted as successful when the true infectious organism is finally selected as the organism candidate. DFS requires success at two stages. First, the true organism must be included among the top 𝑚 " points after ranking by coarse observation. Second, among the candidates that receive fine observation, the organism must have a higher final score than the distractors. For WSI-AI, success means that the true organism is included among the 𝑚 ! candidates receiving detailed observation and has a higher organism score than the other observed candidates. Background heterogeneity therefore affects the two strategies in different ways. In WSI-AI, as 𝜎 9 increases, more distractors with high absolute redness appear, making it harder to distinguish them from the organism. DFS can remove the part of the background variation shared with the local background. However, because the local background does not match the center perfectly, very strong background heterogeneity also reduces the discrimination performance of DFS. 

2.6 Numerical simulation 

We performed Monte Carlo simulations of the model described above and compared the probability of detecting the infectious organism with DFS and WSI-AI. In each trial, one of the M candidate points was set as the organism. For each candidate, we generated a central background 𝑏 8, a local background 𝑏 8;, and site specific variation 𝜂 8. An additional red signal Δ was added to the organism. For DFS, we first generated a coarse observation for every candidate point and ranked the candidates by the coarse score after local background subtraction. We then performed fine observation on the top 𝑚 " points, where 𝑚 " was determined by the available budget. The candidate with the highest final score was judged to be the organism. For WSI-AI, we performed fine observation on 𝑚 ! points in an order that did not depend on location, where 𝑚 ! was determined by the total budget. Among the observed points, the candidate with the highest organism score was judged to be the organism. In the representative calculation, M = 50, Δ = 1.0, κ = 0.10, 𝜌 ; = 0.90, 𝜎 : = 0.15, 𝜎 + = 0.70, 𝜎 ;𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ,c = 0.40, 

𝜎 % = 0.20 , 𝜎 ;,%; = 0.15, c = 0.05, and 𝑐 % = 1.0. The total observation budget B was varied from 3 to 50, and background heterogeneity 𝜎 9 was varied from 0 to 2.0. We performed 5,000 Monte Carlo trials at each grid point. Let 𝑃 "6& be the success probability of DFS and 𝑃 !&' the success probability of WSI-AI. We define their difference as ΔP = 𝑃 "6& − 𝑃 !&' 

ΔP>0 means that DFS is better, and ΔP<0 means that WSI-AI is better. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 12

2.7 Sensitivity to background heterogeneity 

Figure 5 shows 𝛥𝑃 while changing total observation budget B and background heterogeneity 𝜎 9. In the range of low background heterogeneity, there were conditions in which WSI-AI was better than DFS. When the background is fairly uniform, the infectious organism can be identified relatively easily from absolute redness alone. In this setting, using the local background to narrow candidates provides little additional information. DFS also pays a fixed cost to perform coarse observation at every candidate point, which leaves a smaller budget for fine observation. Therefore, under an unrealistically simple background, WSI-AI can be better because it can directly observe more candidate points in detail. As 𝜎 9 increased, the relative performance of DFS improved. Greater variation in background color creates noninfected distractors with high redness. If the organism is identified only by absolute redness, it becomes harder to separate the organism from noninfected regions. DFS uses the difference between the central color and the surrounding local background, so it can remove the part of background variation shared by the two. At moderate background heterogeneity, the information gained from better candidate selection was larger than the cost of coarse observation, and DFS had a higher detection probability than WSI-AI. When background heterogeneity became even larger, however, the gain of DFS did not continue to increase. The local background and the central background do not match perfectly, so residual variation remains even after local background subtraction. With an extremely complex background, DFS also has difficulty separating the organism from distractors. These results show that the relative value of DFS does not increase steadily with background heterogeneity. It changes with the complexity of the background. When the background is simple, the broad coverage of WSI-AI is an advantage. As background variation creates more distractors that resemble the organism, DFS candidate selection using local context becomes more useful. If the background variation becomes extremely large, however, local background correction also reaches its limit in DFS. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 13

Figure 6. Sensitivity of Model II to background heterogeneity 𝜎 9. The horizontal axis is total observation budget 

𝐵 , the vertical axis is background heterogeneity 𝜎 9 , and the color shows 𝛥𝑃 . The 𝛥𝑃 = 0 contour is the boundary where the better method switches between DFS and WSI-AI. WSI-AI is better when background heterogeneity is small. As heterogeneity increases, distractors raise the relative value of DFS, and a region of DFS advantage appears at moderate heterogeneity. At still higher heterogeneity, residual variation remains after local background subtraction, so the DFS gain becomes smaller again. 

2.8 Sensitivity analysis of key assumptions 

To check whether the results of Model II depended only on one parameter setting, we performed sensitivity analyses for three key assumptions: visibility κ of the organism signal during coarse observation, correlation 

𝜌 ;

## 、 between the central and local backgrounds, and coarse view cost c per candidate point. We fixed a representative total observation budget at B = 30 and used the baseline values for the other parameters. For each condition, we ran Monte Carlo simulations and compared changes in 𝛥𝑃 across background heterogeneity 𝜎 9.

2.8.1 Visibility of the organism signal 

Here again, 𝜅 represents how much of the organism specific signal Δ seen in fine observation remains in coarse observation. When 𝜅 is small, the organism signal is strongly diluted in the coarse view. As κ becomes larger, the organism is easier to recognize already at the coarse observation stage. For 𝜅 = 0.05 

## 、0.10 

## 、0.20 , the basic crossover was preserved: WSI-AI was better at low background heterogeneity, and DFS became better as 𝜎 9 increased. The values of 𝜎 9 at which the better method changed were about 0.21, 0.16, and 0.11, respectively. The larger 𝜅 was, the smaller the background heterogeneity needed before DFS became better. This is because more information for identifying the organism remains in coarse observation and can be used by DFS to select candidates. In contrast, when κ = 0.40, DFS was already better than WSI-AI when background heterogeneity was almost zero, and there was no clear crossover. This shows that the advantage of WSI-AI in a uniform background is not an unconditional property of Model II. If the organism can already be recognized clearly during coarse observation, selection by DFS can be useful even when the background is simple. Therefore, the pattern of WSI-AI for a uniform background and DFS for a heterogeneous background requires the condition that the organism signal is diluted to some extent during coarse observation. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 14

Figure 7. Sensitivity to the visibility 𝜅 of the infectious organism signal during coarse observation. Total observation budget is fixed at B = 30, and 𝛥𝑃 is shown as a function of background heterogeneity 𝜎 9. As κ increases, more organism information remains in coarse observation, and the shift to a DFS advantage occurs at a smaller 𝜎 9. When κ is large enough, DFS is better even with a uniform background. 

2.8.2 Local background correlation 

Next, we changed the correlation 𝜌 ; between the background color at the center and in the surrounding local area. A higher correlation allows the central background component to be estimated more accurately from the surrounding background, making local background subtraction more effective. For 𝜌 ; = 0.70, 0.80, 0.90, and 0.97, the same basic pattern was seen. WSI-AI was better when background heterogeneity was small, and DFS became better as 𝜎 9 increased. The change to a DFS advantage occurred at about 𝜎 9 = 0.15–0.24. The presence of the crossover was therefore not limited to one specific 𝜌 ;.The size of the DFS gain, however, depended strongly on 𝜌 ;. The maximum 𝛥𝑃 in the simulation was about 0.09 at 𝜌 ; = 0.70, about 0.22 at 𝜌 ; = 0.90, and about 0.34 at 𝜌 ; = 0.97. This shows that the resistance of DFS to background heterogeneity is not determined by local background subtraction alone. It depends on how well the local background represents the background at the center. When the center and surrounding backgrounds are strongly correlated, their shared background variation can be removed efficiently, so the organism specific signal is easier to preserve even when distractors increase. When 𝜌 ; is low, the surrounding background differs more from the center. Large residual differences then remain after subtraction, and the gain of DFS is smaller. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 15

Figure 8. Sensitivity to the correlation 𝜌 ; between the central background and the local background, with B fixed at 30. As 𝜌 ; increases, local background subtraction removes background variation more effectively, and the DFS gain becomes larger at moderate or high background heterogeneity. 

2.8.3 Coarse observation cost c 

Finally, we changed the cost c of coarse observation. As c increases, DFS pays a larger fixed cost M c to view all candidate points coarsely. This leaves a smaller budget for fine observation. For all values c = 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, and 0.20, WSI-AI was better when background heterogeneity was small. The advantage then shifted to DFS as 𝜎 9 increased. However, as c increased, the crossover moved toward larger values of 𝜎 9. DFS began to outperform WSI-AI at about 𝜎 9 = 0.08 for c = 0.02, 0.14 for c = 0.05, 0.22 for c = 0.10, and 0.33 for c = 0.20. The maximum 𝛥𝑃 also decreased as c increased. It was about 0.24 for c = 0.02 and about 0.15 for c = 0.20. This result agrees with the effect of coarse view cost in Model I. The advantage of DFS does not assume that coarse observation is free. DFS becomes better only when the benefit of better discrimination from local background information is larger than the added cost of the coarse view. When the background is simple, contextual information has little value, so the coarse view cost mainly works against DFS. When background heterogeneity increases and more distractors appear, the information value of selecting candidates with the local background also increases. Within a certain range, this value can make up for the coarse view cost. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 16

Figure 9. Sensitivity to coarse observation cost c with B fixed at 30. As c increases, fewer resources remain for fine observation in DFS. A larger degree of background heterogeneity is therefore needed before DFS becomes better, and the maximum gain of DFS also decreases. 

2.9 Summary of the sensitivity analyses 

These sensitivity analyses showed that the main result of Model II was preserved over a wide range of local background correlation 𝜌 ; and coarse view cost c. As background heterogeneity increased, the better method changed from WSI-AI to DFS. The gain of DFS was generally largest at moderate background heterogeneity and became smaller again when the background became still more complex. The crossover also depended on the visibility κ of the organism signal during coarse observation. When κ was large enough for the organism to be recognized already in the coarse view, DFS could be better even with a uniform background. Therefore, Model II does not mean that DFS must become better whenever background heterogeneity increases. The relative performance of DFS and WSI-AI is instead determined by several factors together. These include how much of the organism signal remains in coarse observation, how well the surrounding background predicts the background at the center, and how much it costs to obtain that information. The region in which DFS was better in Model II can be understood as the range where the information gained by using local context to suppress distractors is larger than the observation cost of the coarse view. In this comparison, WSI-AI is used as a minimal comparator that does not explicitly apply local background correction. If similar local context processing were added to WSI-AI, the difference from DFS shown here could become smaller. The results therefore do not show an unavoidable advantage of one image acquisition method over another. They show the effect of differences in the contextual information and candidate selection rules used under limited resources. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 17

3. Model III: Limited resource analysis of spatially continuous lesions 

3.1 Lesion structure and biological interpretation 

Model III follows the single rare lesion in Model I and the nonuniform background in Model II. It considers a lesion that itself has a spatially continuous structure. Each point represents one lesion unit. The lesion is a square region made of lesion units with the same lesion state, and every point inside the square has the same color and the same state. The variable in this model is therefore the spatial extent over which similar lesion units continue into neighboring areas. 

For each analysis, the side length s of the square is fixed. Across analyses, s is changed among 1, 2, 3, and 4. We interpret s = 1 as a localized lesion and larger s as a more diffuse lesion. 

𝑛 = 7, 𝑀 = 𝑛² = 49 

𝑠 ∈ 1,2,3,4, 𝐿 = 𝑠² ∈ 1,4,9,16 

𝑄 A = (𝑛 − 𝑠 + 1)² ∈ 49,36,25,16 

Here, M is the total number of lesion units, L is the number of abnormal lesion units, and 𝑄 A is the number of possible positions for a square lesion with side length s. Using a 7×7 grid allows direct comparison with M = 49 in Model I. 

Figure 10. Lesion structure in Model III. Each point represents one lesion unit, and only one square lesion is placed. All lesion units inside the square have the same lesion state. Side lengths s = 1, 2, 3, and 4 correspond to 1, 4, 9, and 16 neighboring lesion units being affected. They represent a change from a localized to a more diffuse lesion. Labels in the figure are written in English. 

3.2 Observation endpoints for comparison 

Model III separates two endpoints: finding at least one lesion unit and evaluating the entire square lesion. We call the first discovery and the second complete lesion characterization. As a continuous lesion becomes larger, it becomes easier to encounter at least one abnormal unit. However, fine evaluation of the whole lesion requires several lesion units to be handled together. Separating these two endpoints makes the different roles clearer. WSI-AI is strong at whole area search, while DFS-AI selects a diagnostic field from a coarse overview. 

3.3 WSI-AI: Fine observation without using location information 

Let B be the total observation budget, and let the cost of fine observation of one lesion unit be 𝑐 % = 1. WSI-AI performs fine observation in an order that does not depend on location and does not use coarse selection in advance. The number of lesion units 𝑘 ! that can be observed under budget B is Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

18 

𝑘 ! = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 p𝑀, 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑟i𝐵/𝑐 %jt 

When the location independent fine observation order is averaged over all coordinates, the probability that WSI-AI observes at least one abnormal lesion unit is given by the following hypergeometric expression. 

𝑃 !𝑆𝐼, 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡(𝐵, 𝑠) = 1 − 𝐶(𝑀 − 𝐿, 𝑘 !)/𝐶(𝑀, 𝑘 !)

For the whole lesion to count as completely evaluated in this model, all L = s² abnormal lesion units must be included in fine observation. For this strict endpoint, the probability is 

𝑃 !𝑆𝐼, 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒(𝐵, 𝑠) = 𝐶(𝑘 !, 𝐿)/𝐶(𝑀, 𝐿) 

This definition does not make the general claim that real WSI-AI cannot use local structure. In Model III, WSI-AI is used as a minimal comparator so that we can separate two approaches. One distributes fine resources point by point across the whole area. The other uses a coarse overview to focus fine resources on a continuous field. 

3.4 DFS-AI: Coarse field score using continuous structure 

DFS-AI first performs a low cost coarse observation of all M points. Let 𝐼 8 = 1 for an abnormal lesion unit and 

𝐼 8 = 0 for a nonlesion unit. We represent the coarse score 𝑋 8(+) at point i with the following minimal model. 

𝑋 8(+) = 𝛿𝐼 8 + 𝜀 8, 𝜀 8 𝑁(0,1) 

The parameter δ is the amount of discriminating information in the coarse view for one lesion unit. The key idea of Model III is that an expert does not have to view each point independently. The expert can use whether a signal continues within a square field of the same scale s. We define the structured coarse score 𝐴 B(𝑠) of candidate square q as 

𝐴 B(𝑠) = i1/√𝐿j𝛴 8∈B 𝑋 8(+) 

We use this score. For the true lesion square, all L lesion units are abnormal, so 

𝐸[𝐴 DEFG (𝑠)] = 𝛿√𝐿 = 𝛿𝑠, 𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝐴 DEFG (𝑠)] = 1 

Thus, even if the coarse discriminability δ for each lesion unit is unchanged, increasing the side length of the continuous lesion by a factor of s increases the mean separation of the normalized field score to δs. This is the spatial aggregation gain specific to Model III. 

Let the coarse observation cost per point be c. The fixed cost of viewing the whole area coarsely is M c. Let the cost of fully analyzing one candidate square with fine observation be L 𝑐 %. The number of candidate fields that DFS-AI can analyze in detail, 𝑚 ", is 

𝑚 " = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 K𝑄 A, 𝑚𝑎𝑥 \0, 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑟 p(𝐵 − 𝑀𝑐)/i𝐿𝑐 %jt^L 

DFS-AI selects the top 𝑚 " candidate squares by 𝐴 B(𝑠) and performs fine analysis inside them. Complete lesion characterization is counted as successful if the true square is included among the selected fields. Candidate squares overlap and their scores are correlated. Therefore, 𝑃 "6& , complete is obtained by Monte Carlo simulation rather than by a closed form that assumes independent ranks. 

𝑃 "6& (𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒(𝐵, 𝑠)) = 𝑃𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(𝐴 HEFG ) ≤ 𝑚 "

𝛥𝑃(𝐵, 𝑠) = 𝑃 "6& (𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒(𝐵, 𝑠)) − 𝑃 !&' (𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒(𝐵, 𝑠)) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 19

3.5 Numerical simulation 

The representative conditions were 𝑛 = 7, 𝑀 = 49, 𝑐 % = 1, coarse cost 𝑐 = 0.05, and coarse discriminability δ = 0.5 for each lesion unit. B took integer values from 3 to 49. For each condition s = 1, 2, 3, and 4, the true square location was selected uniformly from the 𝑄 A possible positions. Coarse noise for each lesion unit was generated independently from a standard normal distribution. We then calculated 𝐴 B(𝑠) for all candidate squares, including overlapping squares. We performed 200,000 Monte Carlo trials for each s. WSI-AI discovery and complete characterization were calculated exactly from the combination formulas above. 

3.6 Separating discovery from complete evaluation 

The results showed that the gap between finding at least one abnormal unit and evaluating the whole lesion finely became larger as the lesion grew. For example, at B = 30, the WSI-AI discovery probability was 0.612 for s = 1, 0.982 for s = 2, 0.99995 for s = 3, and almost 1 for s = 4. Thus, when a continuous lesion is large, WSI-AI can find the presence of the lesion with almost complete certainty. 

At the same B = 30, however, the WSI-AI complete characterization probability, which requires all abnormal units in the lesion to be included in fine observation, fell to 0.612, 0.129, 0.00696, and 0.000043 for s = 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. In contrast, the probability that DFS-AI selected the true square field and achieved complete characterization was 0.732, 0.484, 0.516, and 0.369. 

s 𝐿 = 𝑠² WSI: detect ≥1 (B = 30) 

WSI: complete (B = 30) 

DFS: complete (B = 30) 

1 1 0.612 0.612 0.732 

2 4 0.982 0.129 0.484 

3 9 >0.999 0.00696 0.516 

4 16 ≈1.000 0.000043 0.369 

Model III therefore shows that discovery and complete evaluation of lesion extent should not be treated as the same success measure. For a large lesion, whole area fine observation by WSI-AI is very strong for discovery. However, with a limited budget, it is difficult to keep fine information for the entire lesion. If DFS-AI can recognize a continuous pattern in the coarse view, it can focus fine resources on the whole lesion field. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 20

Figure 11. Total observation budget B and success probability in Model III. Each panel shows a square lesion with side length s = 1–4. The figure compares three probabilities: the probability that WSI-AI finds at least one abnormal lesion unit, the probability that WSI-AI includes all abnormal units in the lesion in fine observation, and the probability that DFS-AI selects the true square field for complete evaluation. As the lesion becomes larger, WSI-AI discovery quickly approaches 1. For complete characterization, however, DFS-AI is better in the intermediate resource range. 

3.7 Resource dependent phase transition and lesion size 

For complete characterization, 𝛥𝑃 > 0 for 𝐵 = 5 − 47 when s = 1, B= 7–43 when s = 2, B = 12–46 when s = 3, and B = 19–47 when s = 4. As s increases, the fine cost of one field, 𝐿 = 𝑠² , increases. At very low resources, DFS-AI cannot analyze even one square field in detail, so it has no advantage. For example, when s = 4, 𝑀𝑐 + 𝐿 = 18.45, so an integer budget must satisfy 𝐵 ≥ 19 .

In the intermediate resource range, which is more relevant to practical use, better candidate ranking from spatial aggregation gain is worth more than the fine cost of a field, and the gain of DFS-AI becomes large. The maximum ΔP values for s = 1, 2, 3, and 4 were about 0.133, 0.401, 0.509, and 0.558. Their peaks moved to about B = 22, 27, 30, and 35. As B approaches M = 49, WSI-AI can observe almost every lesion unit finely. The gain of DFS-AI, which still has the fixed coarse view cost, then disappears, and WSI-AI becomes better again. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 21

s L B range where DFS is better Maximum ΔP B at maximum 

1 1 5–47 0.133 22 

2 4 7–43 0.401 27 

3 9 12–46 0.509 30 

4 16 19–47 0.558 35 

Therefore, as in Model I, Model III does not have one method that is better over the whole resource range. 

Low: WSI-AI or not evaluable → Middle: DFS-AI → High: WSI-AI 

This gives a resource dependent phase transition. In Model III, the location of that transition is further determined by lesion size s and the field cost 𝐿 = 𝑠² .

Figure 12. DFS advantage in complete characterization in Model III, 𝛥𝑃 . Values above zero show a DFS-AI advantage. Larger lesions produce a larger maximum gain in the intermediate resource range. The gain disappears at very low resources, where even one field cannot be analyzed, and at high resources, where WSI-AI approaches fine observation of the whole area. 

6.8 Sensitivity to coarse information and coarse cost 

With B fixed at 30, we changed the coarse view discriminability δ per lesion unit from 0 to 2. As δ increased, 

𝛥𝑃 increased for every s, and the increase was stronger for larger s. This agrees with the equation 𝐸[𝐴 DEFG ] = 𝛿𝑠 . As the number of continuous lesion units increases, the same weak signal can be added together at the field level. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 22

When coarse cost c increased from 0 to 0.30, the number of candidate fields 𝑚 " that DFS-AI could analyze finely decreased in steps, and 𝛥𝑃 decreased. For s = 1, the DFS advantage disappeared at about c = 0.20. For s

>1, the field cost is discrete, so the change was stepwise. The gain disappeared when the coarse view cost became so large that even one candidate field could no longer receive fine analysis. 

Interestingly, for s>1, there are conditions in which a small DFS gain for complete characterization remains even when δ = 0. This can happen because, even when the coarse score contains no information, distributing fine resources in continuous square fields can give a higher chance of including the whole lesion at once than point by point allocation. The DFS gain in Model III therefore has two parts: coarse localization information and structured field allocation. 

Figure 13. Sensitivity analysis in Model III. A: ΔP as a function of coarse view discriminability δ at B = 30. As δ increases, the gain of DFS-AI increases. The effect of spatial aggregation is stronger for larger lesions. B: ΔP 

as a function of coarse observation cost 𝑐 at 𝐵 = 30 and δ = 0.5. As c increases, the number of fields that can receive fine analysis decreases, and the DFS gain becomes smaller. 

3.9 Relationship to Models I and II 

In Model I, the value of DFS-AI came from spatial localization information obtained through coarse observation. In Model II, contextual discrimination based on local background information was added in the presence of background heterogeneity and distractors. Model III adds another source of information: several neighboring lesion units can form one continuous lesion structure. The information available to DFS-AI can therefore be organized as 

spatial localization + contextual discrimination + structural aggregation 

These are three layers of information. In Model III, the amplification to δs means that even a weak finding in each lesion unit can be easier to recognize as a diagnostic field in the coarse view when the finding continues at the same spatial scale. This corresponds to tasks such as vasculitis, the border of necrosis, and an invasive front, where the distribution pattern itself can carry more diagnostic information than a single local cell. 

At the same time, Figure 11 shows that if the goal is only to find at least one part of the lesion, WSI-AI has very high sensitivity as the lesion becomes larger. Model III therefore supports a division of roles: WSI-AI for lesion discovery, and DFS-AI for evaluating the extent and relationships of a structure after it has been found. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 23

3.10 Conclusion and limitations of Model III 

The main result of Model III is that spatial continuity can increase the amount of information at the coarse field level even when the local finding itself is unchanged. This raises the value of Diagnostic Field Selection under limited resources. Because the mean normalized true field score increases as δ√L = δs, lesion size is not only the amount of disease. It also acts as structural information that helps field selection. 

This is a minimal model that assumes a square grid, one lesion, a known analysis scale s, and uniform lesion strength. Real vasculitis lesions can have irregular shapes, uneven vessel density, several lesions, and variation in lesion strength. If WSI-AI used similar multiscale spatial aggregation or local structure recognition, the difference from DFS-AI shown here could become smaller. These results therefore do not assign an unavoidable advantage to one image acquisition method. They isolate the information value of an expert recognizing a continuous structure in a coarse view and selecting a field for fine analysis under limited resources. 

In summary, Model III shows the following complementary relationship: 

WSI-AI: global discovery / DFS-AI: structure guided complete characterization 

WSI-AI is better when the main endpoint is to find lesions without missing them. DFS-AI can be better when the main endpoint is to evaluate the spatial extent and continuity of a lesion with limited fine resources. 

4. Which method is better for which tasks? 4.1 Conditions that favor DFS-AI 

DFS-AI is more likely to be useful when several of the following conditions are present. 1. Diagnostic information is not distributed evenly within the WSI. 2. Experts can identify the fields needed for diagnosis with reasonable consistency. 3. Relationships across several fields and magnifications are important for diagnosis. 4. There is large variation with low diagnostic relevance, such as normal tissue, staining differences, tissue amount, and artifacts. 5. The number of cases available to train a fully automatic selector is limited. For histologic type classification, tissue patterns such as glands, nests, cords, and papillary structures must be combined with high magnification cell features. Invasion cannot be judged only by the presence of tumor cells. The relationship between the lesion and surrounding tissue, including contact, destruction, and stromal response, must also be evaluated. Lesions also need to be understood through the relationship among cell type, tissue compartment, distribution, tissue injury, and time phase, not just by cell count. In such tasks, experts can choose fields and magnifications based on a diagnostic hypothesis and use AI for local classification, measurement, and comparison. This can focus information resources on the most relevant parts. As shown in Model III, when similar lesions extend continuously into neighboring lesion units, recognizing the structure in a coarse view and selecting a field can itself help focus fine analysis resources. In the main diagnostic benchmark for PathChat, pathologists selected salient ROIs from the WSI and entered them into the model. This can be viewed as a real example of DFS style use of AI [12]. This does not mean that PathChat itself should be called DFS. It simply shows that expert selection of the fields given to AI is a practical way to use the model. 

4.2 Conditions that favor WSI-AI 

WSI-AI is strong when finding the target location itself is the main task, especially when an expert cannot limit the location in advance. This can occur in a large surgical section when it is not even known whether a lesion is Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 24

present. For a target positive case, let 𝑝 be the probability that the target is included in the AI analysis, and let 

𝑠 be the conditional sensitivity after the target has been included. A simplified overall sensitivity is then 

Sensitivity = 𝑝 𝑠 

With expert field selection in advance, a target outside the selected fields cannot be detected no matter how accurate the later AI analysis is. Coverage 𝑝 therefore sets the upper limit of overall sensitivity. If WSI-AI can search all tissue at enough resolution and make 𝑝 close to 1, it has a major advantage for finding rare targets. The presence or absence of lymph node metastasis, especially a small metastatic focus, is a typical example. Here, the main information processing task is to find a target whose location is unknown before interpreting what the candidate is. Studies such as CAMELYON16 have shown that WSI-AI can achieve high performance in this type of whole area search [11]. 

5. Discussion 

The main point of this study is not to decide whether WSI-AI or DFS-AI is generally better. It is to show that the better method changes according to which type of information loss is larger. With unlimited observation, a complete WSI includes DFS. In practice, however, AI must compress the information into a representation of limited length. If low relevance variation in the WSI competes for internal representation, learning, and selection, then access to the whole slide does not automatically mean better retention of diagnostic information. DFS reduces this competition, but it also carries the risk that the expert may fail to select an important field. Model III adds spatial organization to this switching condition. It shows that the best observation method may differ between finding a lesion and evaluating the full structure of that lesion. From this view, DFS is better understood not as a method that uses a small ROI, but as a method in which an expert distributes the information rate across space and magnification according to the diagnostic task [14, 15]. This is especially important for relational tasks such as histologic type, invasion, and inflammation. The key is not to compress everything into one field, but to keep the relationships among the several fields that are needed. In contrast, a task such as detecting a small lymph node metastasis in a surgical specimen is a clear counterexample to DFS. If the cost of missing a target is high, expert selection in advance may reduce coverage. In that case, it can be worth paying the computing cost of processing regions with low relevance in order to search the whole area. Information selection for interpretation and discovery of a target with an unknown location should therefore be discussed separately. In this situation, a suitable workflow may be WSI analysis supported by prior learning from the primary lesion, followed by expert review of the result. The quantities 𝑐 # and 𝑑 "(𝐶) used in the restricted model are theoretical quantities, not directly observed physical measurements. They may be estimated in an operational way from factors such as the background dependence of WSI-AI, experiments that remove or exchange background regions, and the difference in log loss between DFS and the full WSI. What counts as low relevance information 𝑁 also depends on the diagnostic task. A region with low relevance for histologic type diagnosis may still be important for prognosis or for measuring the total amount of disease. Research such as Pathology-CoT [13], which trains AI on the experts' own viewing behavior, includes a different problem from the comparison in this study. If AI learns past expert viewing strategies, changes future expert viewing through its own suggestions, and those changed behaviors are then returned to the training data, the process becomes a recursive system in which later training data depend on an earlier AI. We do not include this recursive learning in the static comparison of WSI-AI and DFS-AI. In our comparison, expert viewing strategy remains outside the AI, and AI is treated as an image analysis tool. In pathology AI under limited resources, giving the whole WSI as input does not by itself guarantee the best use of diagnostic information. WSI-AI provides whole area coverage, but it uses limited resources to Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 25

process, compress, and combine regions with low relevance. DFS-AI can focus resources on diagnostically relevant fields, but it carries the risk that an expert may miss an important field during selection. The relative advantage of the two methods therefore depends on which is larger: information loss in WSI-AI from background processing and aggregation, or information loss in DFS from selection. DFS-AI is more likely to be useful in tasks where diagnostic information is unevenly distributed, multiscale, and relational, and where expert knowledge is essential. Examples include histologic type, invasive borders, and patterns of inflammation. WSI-AI is more likely to be useful when the main task is to find a rare target without missing it, such as a small lymph node metastasis. It is important to choose the form of AI use according to the information structure of the diagnostic task. 

6. References 

1. Shannon CE. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal . 1948;27:379– 423, 623–656. 2. Cover TM, Thomas JA. Elements of Information Theory . 2nd ed. Wiley; 2006. 3. Berger T. Rate Distortion Theory: A Mathematical Basis for Data Compression . Prentice-Hall; 1971. 4. Tishby N, Pereira FC, Bialek W. The information bottleneck method. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing. 1999. 5. Campanella G, Hanna MG, Geneslaw L, et al. Clinical-grade computational pathology using weakly supervised deep learning on whole slide images. Nature Medicine . 2019;25:1301–1309. doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0508-1. 6. Lu MY, Williamson DFK, Chen TY, et al. Data-efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole-slide images. Nature Biomedical Engineering . 2021;5:555–570. doi:10.1038/s41551-020-00682-w. 7. Xu H, Usuyama N, Bagga J, et al. A whole-slide foundation model for digital pathology from real-world data. Nature . 2024;630:181–188. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07441-w. 8. Ding T, Wagner SJ, Song AH, et al. A multimodal whole-slide foundation model for pathology. Nature Medicine . 2025;31:3749–3761. doi:10.1038/s41591-025-03982-3. 9. Digital image analysis in pathologist-selected regions of interest predicts survival more accurately than whole-slide analysis: a direct comparison study in 153 gastric carcinomas. Journal of Pathology: Clinical Research . 2020. doi:10.1002/cjp2.179. 10. Ghezloo F, Wang PC, Kerr KF, et al. An analysis of pathologists’ viewing processes as they diagnose whole slide digital images. Journal of Pathology Informatics . 2022;13:100104. doi:10.1016/j.jpi.2022.100104. 11. Ehteshami Bejnordi B, Veta M, van Diest PJ, et al. Diagnostic assessment of deep learning algorithms for detection of lymph node metastases in women with breast cancer. JAMA . 2017;318(22):2199–2210. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.14585. 12. Lu MY, Chen B, Williamson DFK, et al. A multimodal generative AI copilot for human pathology. 

Nature . 2024;634:466–473. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07618-3. 13. Wang S, et al. Pathology-CoT: learning visual chain-of-thought agents from expert whole-slide image diagnosis behaviour. Nature Biomedical Engineering . 2026. doi:10.1038/s41551-026-01739-y. 14. Fujimoto D, Isokawa T, Matsui N, Kamiura N, Tsuruyama T. Region-of-interest histopathology with fine-tuned CNNs enables colorectal cancer grading and pathologic stage estimation. Sci Rep . 2026 Jul 2. doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-59815-x. Online ahead of print. 15. Yamaguchi S, Isokawa T, Matsui N, Kamiura N, Tsuruyama T. AI system for diagnosing mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma and diffuse large B cell lymphoma using ImageNet and hematoxylin and eosin-stained specimens. PNAS Nexus. 2025 Apr 30;4(5):pgaf137. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgaf137. Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 26

""" Model I Figures 2–4 Red/blue version: ΔP = P(DFS) - P(WSI) > 0 -> red ΔP = P(DFS) - P(WSI) < 0 -> blue ΔP = 0 -> white / black contour The script both saves each figure and calls plt.show(), so the plots are displayed when run in Jupyter/IPython or a local Python session. """ import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt from matplotlib.colors import TwoSlopeNorm from scipy.stats import norm, binom from numpy.polynomial.hermite import hermgauss M = 49 c_f = 1.0 c_c = 0.05 delta0 = 0.5 gh_x, gh_w = hermgauss(80) gh_norm = np.sqrt(np.pi) def p_target_in_top_m(M, m, delta): if m <= 0: return 0.0 if m >= M: return 1.0 z = delta + np.sqrt(2.0) * gh_x p_normal_above = 1.0 - norm.cdf(z) vals = binom.cdf(m - 1, M - 1, p_normal_above) return float(np.sum(gh_w * vals) / gh_norm) def p_wsi(B, M=M, c_f=c_f): k = min(M, int(np.floor(B / c_f))) return k / M def p_dfs(B, delta, M=M, c_f=c_f, c_c=c_c): m = int(np.floor((B - M*c_c) / c_f)) if m <= 0: return 0.0 m = min(M, m) return p_target_in_top_m(M, m, delta) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 27

plt.rcParams.update({ "font.size": 11, "axes.titlesize": 14, "axes.labelsize": 12, "legend.fontsize": 10, "xtick.labelsize": 10, "ytick.labelsize": 10, }) # ---------------- Figure 2 ----------------B_values = np.arange(1, 50) wsi = np.array([p_wsi(B) for B in B_values]) dfs = np.array([p_dfs(B, delta0) for B in B_values]) fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8.2, 5.4)) ax.plot(B_values, wsi, linewidth=2.4, color="#2166ac", label="WSI-AI: fine trace") ax.plot(B_values, dfs, linewidth=2.4, color="#b2182b", label="DFS-AI: coarse view → focused fine analysis") ax.set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") ax.set_ylabel("Probability of detecting the lesion") ax.set_title("Model I: exact coordinate-averaged performance") ax.set_xlim(1, 49) ax.set_ylim(0, 1.02) ax.grid(True, alpha=0.22) ax.legend(loc="upper left") fig.tight_layout() fig.savefig("Figure2_ModelI_WSI_vs_DFS_redblue.png", dpi=320, bbox_inches="tight", facecolor="white") plt.show() # ---------------- Figure 3 ----------------delta_values = np.linspace(0.0, 2.0, 161) adv = np.array([ [p_dfs(B, d) - p_wsi(B) for B in B_values] for d in delta_values ]) norm = TwoSlopeNorm(vmin=float(adv.min()), vcenter=0.0, vmax=float(adv.max())) fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8.4, 5.7)) mesh = ax.pcolormesh(B_values, delta_values, adv, shading="auto", cmap="RdBu_r", norm=norm) zero = ax.contour(B_values, delta_values, adv, levels=[0.0], colors="black", linewidths=1.5) ax.clabel(zero, fmt={0.0: "ΔP = 0"}, inline=True, fontsize=9) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 28

ax.set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") ax.set_ylabel("Coarse-view discriminability δ") ax.set_title("Model I: DFS advantage over WSI") cbar = fig.colorbar(mesh, ax=ax, pad=0.02) cbar.set_label("ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI)") ax.text(0.98, 0.96, "Red: DFS better (ΔP > 0)", transform=ax.transAxes, ha="right", va="top", fontsize=9, bbox=dict(facecolor="white", alpha=0.78, edgecolor="0.75")) ax.text(0.98, 0.89, "Blue: WSI better (ΔP < 0)", transform=ax.transAxes, ha="right", va="top", fontsize=9, bbox=dict(facecolor="white", alpha=0.78, edgecolor="0.75")) fig.tight_layout() fig.savefig("Figure3_ModelI_phase_B_delta_redblue.png", dpi=320, bbox_inches="tight", facecolor="white") plt.show() # ---------------- Figure 4 ----------------cc_values = np.linspace(0.0, 0.20, 101) adv_cost = np.array([ [p_dfs(B, delta0, c_c=cc) - p_wsi(B) for B in B_values] for cc in cc_values ]) norm = TwoSlopeNorm(vmin=float(adv_cost.min()), vcenter=0.0, vmax=float(adv_cost.max())) fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8.4, 5.7)) mesh = ax.pcolormesh(B_values, cc_values, adv_cost, shading="auto", cmap="RdBu_r", norm=norm) zero = ax.contour(B_values, cc_values, adv_cost, levels=[0.0], colors="black", linewidths=1.5) ax.clabel(zero, fmt={0.0: "ΔP = 0"}, inline=True, fontsize=9) ax.set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") ax.set_ylabel("Coarse-view cost per site $c_c$") ax.set_title("Model I: sensitivity to coarse-view cost (δ = 0.5)") cbar = fig.colorbar(mesh, ax=ax, pad=0.02) cbar.set_label("ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI)") ax.text(0.98, 0.96, "Red: DFS better (ΔP > 0)", transform=ax.transAxes, ha="right", va="top", fontsize=9, bbox=dict(facecolor="white", alpha=0.78, edgecolor="0.75")) ax.text(0.98, 0.89, "Blue: WSI better (ΔP < 0)", transform=ax.transAxes, ha="right", va="top", fontsize=9, bbox=dict(facecolor="white", alpha=0.78, edgecolor="0.75")) fig.tight_layout() fig.savefig("Figure4_ModelI_phase_B_coarsecost_redblue.png", dpi=320, bbox_inches="tight", facecolor="white") plt.show() Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 29

import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt from matplotlib.colors import TwoSlopeNorm # ============================================================ # Model II: local-background subtraction + distractor model # Figures 6–9 # ============================================================ M = 50 Delta = 1.0 sigma_intrinsic = 0.15 sigma_c = 0.70 sigma_local_c = 0.40 sigma_f = 0.20 sigma_local_f = 0.15 c_f = 1.0 # Baseline values kappa0 = 0.10 rho0 = 0.90 c_c0 = 0.05 # Monte Carlo settings n_trials_fig6 = 5000 n_trials_sens = 6000 seed = 20260811 # Plot style: same red-white-blue convention as revised Figures 3–4 # red = DFS advantage; blue = WSI advantage; white = ΔP = 0 cmap = plt.get_cmap("RdBu_r") def simulate_point(B, sigma_b, kappa=kappa0, rho_local=rho0, c_c=c_c0, n_trials=5000, rng=None): if rng is None: rng = np.random.default_rng() m_D = int(np.floor((B - M * c_c) / c_f)) m_W = int(np.floor(B / c_f)) m_D = max(0, min(M, m_D)) m_W = max(0, min(M, m_W)) # Correlated center/local background u = rng.normal(size=(n_trials, M)) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 30

v = rng.normal(size=(n_trials, M)) b_center = sigma_b * u b_local = sigma_b * ( rho_local * u + np.sqrt(max(0.0, 1.0 - rho_local**2)) * v )# Site-specific variation eta = rng.normal(0.0, sigma_intrinsic, size=(n_trials, M)) # Put the infectious organism at index 0 without loss of generality x_fine = b_center + eta x_fine[:, 0] += Delta # Coarse signal is diluted by kappa x_coarse = b_center + eta x_coarse[:, 0] += kappa * Delta # DFS coarse score: local-background subtraction coarse_center = x_coarse + rng.normal( 0.0, sigma_c, size=(n_trials, M) )coarse_local = b_local + rng.normal( 0.0, sigma_local_c, size=(n_trials, M) )score_coarse_DFS = coarse_center - coarse_local # DFS fine score: local-background subtraction fine_center_DFS = x_fine + rng.normal( 0.0, sigma_f, size=(n_trials, M) )fine_local_DFS = b_local + rng.normal( 0.0, sigma_local_f, size=(n_trials, M) )score_fine_DFS = fine_center_DFS - fine_local_DFS # WSI comparator: absolute fine-scale redness score_fine_WSI = x_fine + rng.normal( 0.0, sigma_f, size=(n_trials, M) )# ----- DFS -----if m_D == 0: p_DFS = 0.0 else: idx_D = np.argpartition( score_coarse_DFS, -m_D, axis=1 )[:, -m_D:] Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 31

vals_D = np.take_along_axis(score_fine_DFS, idx_D, axis=1) winner_D = idx_D[ np.arange(n_trials), np.argmax(vals_D, axis=1) ]p_DFS = np.mean(winner_D == 0) # ----- WSI -----if m_W == 0: p_WSI = 0.0 else: # Uniform location-independent sampling keys = rng.random((n_trials, M)) idx_W = np.argpartition(keys, m_W - 1, axis=1)[:, :m_W] vals_W = np.take_along_axis(score_fine_WSI, idx_W, axis=1) winner_W = idx_W[ np.arange(n_trials), np.argmax(vals_W, axis=1) ]p_WSI = np.mean(winner_W == 0) return p_DFS, p_WSI, p_DFS - p_WSI # ============================================================ # Figure 6: B × background heterogeneity sigma_b # ============================================================ budgets = np.arange(3, 51, 1) sigma_b_values = np.linspace(0.0, 2.0, 31) Z = np.zeros((len(sigma_b_values), len(budgets))) rng = np.random.default_rng(seed) for i, sb in enumerate(sigma_b_values): for j, B in enumerate(budgets): _, _, Z[i, j] = simulate_point( B, sb, kappa=kappa0, rho_local=rho0, c_c=c_c0, n_trials=n_trials_fig6, rng=rng )norm = TwoSlopeNorm( vmin=float(np.min(Z)), Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 32

vcenter=0.0, vmax=float(np.max(Z)) )fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8.2, 5.7)) mesh = ax.pcolormesh( budgets, sigma_b_values, Z, shading="auto", cmap=cmap, norm=norm )cs = ax.contour( budgets, sigma_b_values, Z, levels=[0], colors="black", linewidths=1.25 )ax.clabel(cs, fmt={0: "ΔP = 0"}, fontsize=8) cbar = fig.colorbar(mesh, ax=ax) cbar.set_label("ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI)") ax.set_title("Model II: DFS advantage over WSI") ax.set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") ax.set_ylabel(r"Background heterogeneity $\sigma_b$") ax.text( 0.98, 0.97, "Red: DFS better (ΔP > 0)\nBlue: WSI better (ΔP < 0)", transform=ax.transAxes, ha="right", va="top", fontsize=8, bbox=dict(facecolor="white", edgecolor="0.7", alpha=0.9) )fig.tight_layout() fig.savefig("Figure6_ModelII_background_heterogeneity_redblue.png", dpi=300, bbox_inches="tight") plt.show() # ============================================================ # Figures 7–9: sensitivity curves at B = 30 # ============================================================ B_fixed = 30 sigma_b_sens = np.linspace(0.0, 2.0, 41) def sensitivity_curves(param_name, param_values): curves = {} Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 33

rng = np.random.default_rng(seed) for p in param_values: vals = [] for sb in sigma_b_sens: kwargs = { "kappa": kappa0, "rho_local": rho0, "c_c": c_c0 }kwargs[param_name] = p _, _, dp = simulate_point( B_fixed, sb, n_trials=n_trials_sens, rng=rng, **kwargs )vals.append(dp) curves[p] = np.asarray(vals) return curves def plot_curves(curves, title, legend_symbol, filename): params = sorted(curves.keys()) colors = cmap(np.linspace(0.12, 0.88, len(params))) fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8.2, 5.4)) for color, p in zip(colors, params): ax.plot( sigma_b_sens, curves[p], lw=2.0, color=color, label=fr"{legend_symbol} = {p:.2f}" )ax.axhline(0, color="black", lw=1.0, ls="--") ax.set_xlabel(r"Background heterogeneity $\sigma_b$") ax.set_ylabel("ΔP = P(DFS) − P(WSI)") ax.set_title(title) ax.legend(frameon=True) ax.grid(alpha=0.20) fig.tight_layout() fig.savefig(filename, dpi=300, bbox_inches="tight") Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 34

plt.show() # Figure 7: kappa curves_kappa = sensitivity_curves( "kappa", [0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.40] )plot_curves( curves_kappa, r"Model II: sensitivity to coarse-scale visibility $\kappa$ ($B=30$)", r"$\kappa$", "Figure7_ModelII_kappa_redblue.png" )# Figure 8: rho_local curves_rho = sensitivity_curves( "rho_local", [0.70, 0.80, 0.90, 0.97] )plot_curves( curves_rho, r"Model II: sensitivity to local-background correlation $\rho_{\mathrm{local}}$ ($B=30$)", r"$\rho_{\mathrm{local}}$", "Figure8_ModelII_rho_local_redblue.png" )# Figure 9: coarse-view cost c_c curves_cc = sensitivity_curves( "c_c", [0.02, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20] )plot_curves( curves_cc, r"Model II: sensitivity to coarse-view cost $c_c$ ($B=30$)", r"$c_c$", "Figure9_ModelII_coarse_cost_redblue.png" )import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt from math import comb, floor, sqrt # ============================================================ # Model III - Figure 11 # Discovery and complete characterization under finite resources # ============================================================ # -----------------------------Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 35

# Baseline parameters # -----------------------------n = 7 M = n * n # total lesion units = 49 fine_cost = 1.0 # cost of fine observation per lesion unit coarse_cost = 0.05 # coarse observation cost per point delta = 0.5 # coarse-view discriminability per lesion unit B_values = np.arange(3, 50) # B = 3, ..., 49 N_TRIALS = 200_000 SEED = 12345 # ============================================================ # WSI-AI # ============================================================ def wsi_discovery_probability(B, s): """ Probability that WSI-AI observes at least one abnormal lesion unit. The lesion contains L = s^2 abnormal units. WSI finely observes m units without using location information. """ L = s * s m = min( M, int(np.floor(B / fine_cost)) )if m <= 0: return 0.0 if m > M - L: return 1.0 return 1.0 - comb(M - L, m) / comb(M, m) def wsi_complete_probability(B, s): """ Probability that WSI-AI includes ALL L = s^2 abnormal lesion units in fine observation. """ Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 36

L = s * s m = min( M, int(np.floor(B / fine_cost)) )if m < L: return 0.0 return comb(M - L, m - L) / comb(M, m) # ============================================================ # DFS-AI # ============================================================ def simulate_true_field_ranks( s, n_trials=N_TRIALS, delta=delta, seed=SEED, batch_size=10_000 ): """ Monte Carlo simulation of the rank of the true lesion square. Point-level coarse score: X_i = delta * A_i + epsilon_i where A_i = 1 for lesion units 0 otherwise epsilon_i ~ N(0,1) Candidate field score: T_q = (1 / sqrt(L)) * sum_{i in q} X_i For the true lesion field: E[T_true] = delta * sqrt(L) = delta * s Candidate squares overlap, so their scores are correlated. Therefore the rank distribution is obtained by Monte Carlo. """ rng = np.random.default_rng(seed + s) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 37

L = s * s q_side = n - s + 1 Q = q_side * q_side positions = [ (r, c) for r in range(q_side) for c in range(q_side) ]ranks = np.empty(n_trials, dtype=np.int16) completed = 0 while completed < n_trials: batch = min(batch_size, n_trials - completed) true_idx = rng.integers(0, Q, size=batch) X = rng.standard_normal((batch, n, n)) for j, (r, c) in enumerate(positions): mask = (true_idx == j) if np.any(mask): X[mask, r:r+s, c:c+s] += delta field_scores = np.empty((batch, Q), dtype=float) for j, (r, c) in enumerate(positions): field_scores[:, j] = ( X[:, r:r+s, c:c+s].sum(axis=(1, 2)) / sqrt(L) )true_scores = field_scores[ np.arange(batch), true_idx ]batch_ranks = ( 1+ np.sum( field_scores > true_scores[:, None], Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 38

axis=1 ))ranks[completed:completed + batch] = batch_ranks completed += batch return ranks def dfs_complete_curve(B_values, s, ranks): """ Probability that DFS-AI includes the true lesion square among the candidate fields selected for fine analysis. """ L = s * s q_side = n - s + 1 Q = q_side * q_side total_coarse_cost = M * coarse_cost probabilities = [] for B in B_values: remaining_budget = B - total_coarse_cost if remaining_budget < L * fine_cost: k = 0 else: k = int( floor( remaining_budget / (L * fine_cost) ))k = max(0, min(k, Q)) if k == 0: p = 0.0 else: p = np.mean(ranks <= k) probabilities.append(p) Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 39

return np.asarray(probabilities) # ============================================================ # Calculate all curves # ============================================================ results = {} for s in [1, 2, 3, 4]: print(f"Simulating s = {s} ...") wsi_detect = np.array([ wsi_discovery_probability(B, s) for B in B_values ]) wsi_complete = np.array([ wsi_complete_probability(B, s) for B in B_values ]) ranks = simulate_true_field_ranks( s=s, n_trials=N_TRIALS, seed=SEED )dfs_complete = dfs_complete_curve( B_values=B_values, s=s, ranks=ranks )results[s] = { "WSI_detect": wsi_detect, "WSI_complete": wsi_complete, "DFS_complete": dfs_complete }# ============================================================ # Check values at B = 30 # ============================================================ Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 40

print("\nValues at B = 30") print("--------------------------------------------") idx30 = np.where(B_values == 30)[0][0] for s in [1, 2, 3, 4]: print( f"s={s}: " f"WSI detect >=1 = " f"{results[s]['WSI_detect'][idx30]:.6f}, " f"WSI complete = " f"{results[s]['WSI_complete'][idx30]:.6f}, " f"DFS complete = " f"{results[s]['DFS_complete'][idx30]:.6f}" )# ============================================================ # Plot Figure 11 # ============================================================ fig, axes = plt.subplots( 2, 2, figsize=(10, 7), sharex=True, sharey=True )axes = axes.flatten() for ax, s in zip(axes, [1, 2, 3, 4]): L = s * s ax.plot( B_values, results[s]["WSI_detect"], linewidth=2.0, label="WSI-AI: detect ≥1 lesion unit" )ax.plot( B_values, results[s]["WSI_complete"], linewidth=2.0, Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 41

label="WSI-AI: complete lesion characterization" )ax.plot( B_values, results[s]["DFS_complete"], linewidth=2.0, label="DFS-AI: complete lesion-field selection" )ax.set_title( f"s = {s} (L = {L})", fontsize=11 )ax.set_xlim(3, 49) ax.set_ylim(0, 1.02) ax.grid(alpha=0.25) axes[0].set_ylabel("Success probability") axes[2].set_ylabel("Success probability") axes[2].set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") axes[3].set_xlabel("Total observation budget B") fig.suptitle( "Model III: discovery and complete characterization under finite resources", fontsize=13, y=0.98 )handles, labels = axes[0].get_legend_handles_labels() fig.legend( handles, labels, loc="lower center", bbox_to_anchor=(0.5, -0.02), ncol=1, frameon=False, fontsize=9 )Information Theory of Diagnostic Field Selection 

> 42

plt.tight_layout( rect=[0, 0.10, 1, 0.95] )plt.savefig( "Figure11_ModelIII.png", dpi=600, bbox_inches="tight" )plt.savefig( "Figure11_ModelIII.pdf", bbox_inches="tight" )plt.show()