Title: Spatial proteomics reveals CD8+ T cell signatures and cellular niches associated with active HIV-1 replication in lymph nodes

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
Spatial proteomics reveals CD8+ T cell signatures and cellular niches associated 

with active HIV -1 replication in lymph nodes 

Candace C. Liu 1,* , Marta Calvet -Mirabent 2,3,* , Angie Spence 1, Mako Goldston 1, Magdalena 

Adrados de Llano 4, Sean C. Bendall 1, Michael Angelo 1,# , Enrique Martín -Gayo 2,5,6,# 

> 1

Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA 

> 2

Immunology Unit from Hospital Universitario de La Princesa and Instituto de Investigación 

Sanitaria Princesa (IISP), Madrid, Spain 

> 3

Gladstone Institute of Virology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 

> 4

Pathology Unit, Hospital Universitario La Princesa, Madrid, Spain 

> 5

Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 

Madrid, Spain 

> 6

CIBER Infecciosas (CIBERINFEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain 

*Equal contribution 

> #

Co -corresponding authors 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Despite its effectiveness in suppressing active HIV -1 replication, antiretroviral therapy (ART) does 

not eliminate the persistent long -lived pool of HIV -1-infected reservoir cells, preventing the 

eradication of the infection. Lymphoid tissues are key anato mical sites where these reservoirs 

persist even in the presence of ART, but the mechanisms that are associated with viral persistence 

in lymphoid tissues and how tissue networks are reshaped in the setting of viral replication remain 

incompletely understoo d. Advances in tissue imaging offer a unique opportunity to characterize 

immune correlates of viral persistence. Here, we used a spatial proteomic method to map immune 

microenvironments in HIV -1-infected lymph nodes (LNs) at different stages of infection, including 

with or without ART. LNs from people with HIV -1 (PWH) were characterized by lower CD4+ T cell 

counts and higher CD8+ T cell counts in both the whole tissue and within follicles compared to 

people without HIV (PWOH). CD8+ T cells were more abundan t in LN samples with active viral 

replication, defined by detection of the viral protein p24. Further characterization of p24+ LNs 

showed that CD8+ T cells located inside of B cell follicles exhibited higher levels of markers 

associated with immune activat ion and exhaustion, in addition to the inflammasome protein 

caspase -1. Using a spatial niche detection method, we found that LNs from PWH with varying 

levels of viral replication were differentially enriched for CD8+ T cells near antigen -presenting 

cells, myeloid cells, and fibroblasts. Notably, we found that p24+ cells were less enriched near 

CD8+ T cells but closer to follicular dendritic cells. Finally, comparing LNs from viremic and 

aviremic donors , where viremia was defined by detectable plasma viral load, we found low levels 

of activation markers in CD11c+ cells in aviremic donors, including NLRP3 inflammasome 

activation . Thus, using spatial proteomics to map the immune landscape in LNs, we identified 

novel markers characterizing immune cell subsets an d tissue microenvironments that were 

differently enriched in PWH with varying levels of viremia, implying that HIV -1 infection confers 

long -term changes on the immune landscape in LN tissue. Collectively, these data provide new 

insights into the complex ce ll networks associated with viral replication at a key tissue reservoir 

site, which could be relevant for future HIV -1 cure strategies. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

HIV -1 infection remains one of the most significant global health challenges, with over 40 million 

people living with the virus worldwide 1. While the introduction of antiretroviral therapy (ART) has 

transformed HIV -1 infection from a fatal disease to a manageable chronic condition, achieving a 

functional cure remains elusive due to the persistence of latent viral reservoirs in different 

tissu es 2–7. These reservoirs are composed of heterogeneous infected cells, which can reactivate 

HIV -1 replication and produce infectious viral particles when ART is discontinued, necessitating 

lifelong treatment for people with HIV -1 (PWH) 2,8,9 .

While most previous studies on HIV -1 reservoirs have focused on peripheral blood, lymph nodes 

(LNs) serve as critical anatomical sites for HIV -1 pathogenesis and persistence 4,10 –15 . The 

complex architecture of LNs, with distinct anatomical compartments including B cell follicles, 

germinal centers, and T cell zones, creates specialized niches that may influence the dynamics 

between reservoir establishment, viral replication, and infla mmatory responses. Understanding 

the spatial organization of immune responses within these tissues is essential for elucidating the 

altered landscapes that could be limiting the efficacy of current immunotherapy candidates and 

for improving cure strategie s. 

While CD8+ T cells play a central role in controlling HIV -1 infection through their ability to 

recognize and eliminate virally infected cells 16 –18 , their effectiveness in LNs is limited by several 

factors, including the potential development of T cell exhaustion, which is characterized by the 

progressive loss of effector functions and increased expression of inhibitory receptors , commonly 

observed in chronic viral infections. Our previous work indicated that memory CD8+ T cells from 

PWH with different checkpoint receptor patterns have different functional profiles, and PD1, TIGIT, 

and TIM3 are associated with the ability to elimina te HIV -1-infected C D4+ T cells 19 . Viral 

replication has also been associated with inflammatory pathways such as inflammasome 

activation that may affect the immune landscape in LNs 20 –22 .

In addition, t he "follicular sanctuary" hypothesis proposes that infected cells within B cell follicles 

are protected from CD8+ T cell -mediated killing due to the exclusion of CD8+ T cells from these 

regions, allowing viral reservoirs to persist in follicular helper T ( Tfh) cells and other populations 23 –

> 25

. Studies in primate and human tissues suggest that immune control of HIV -1 infection may 

correlate with the capacity of cytotoxic CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells to infiltrate into B cell follicles 26 –32 .

While it has previously been described that a higher proportion of cytotoxic follicular CD8+ T cells 

is associated with viral control, the functional characteristics, including the exhaustion and 

inflammatory state of these infiltrating cells , are not fully understood. Moreover, our understanding 

of the spatial relationships between these effector cells and HIV -1-infected cells in lymphoid tissue 

remains incomplete. 

Here, we present the first comprehensive spatial proteomic analysis of LNs from PWH using 

multiplexed imaging by time -of -flight (MIBI -TOF) 33,34 . By simultaneously profiling 40 proteins 

across HIV+ and HIV - donors, we characterized the fundamental alterations in LN architecture 

associated with HIV -1 infection and their relationship to viral replication status. We found 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

substantial CD8+ T cell infiltration in HIV+ LNs, including into B cell follicles, with these cells 

exhibiting distinct activation states in tissues showing viral activation, including higher expression 

of the inflammasome protein caspase -1 and differentia l expression patterns associated with 

checkpoint, cytotoxicity, and effector function. We found that the spatial proximity of CD8+ T cells 

to antigen -presenting cells (APCs) and stromal populations varied based on viral replication 

status. Additionally, we observed altered myeloid cell compositions and lower inflammasome 

activation in tissues from aviremic PWH . These findings provide a rationale for how distinct spatial 

niches within LNs, characterized by elevated checkpoint receptor expression, inflammasome 

activation, and CD8+ T cell association with myeloid and stromal cells, may contribute to HIV -1

persiste nce. 

Results 

Mapping the global immune landscape in lymph nodes 

To investigate the changes in cellular organization in LNs due to HIV -1 infection, LN tissue from 

five PWH were obtained from the Pathology Anatomy Unit at Hospital Universitario La Princesa 

(Madrid, Spain), in addition to LNs from five people without HIV -1 (PWOH) included as negative 

controls (Figure 1a). Among the PWH, t wo donors were individuals on ART with fully suppressed 

viremia, while three were individuals with detectable plasma viral loads (Figure S1a, 

Supplementary Table 1). Of the latter group, t wo tissue samples exhibited detectable staining of 

the HIV -1 protein p24, which serves as a marker for active viral replication. The two samples with 

detectable p24 tissue staining correspondingly had the highest plasma viral loads (Supplementary 

Table 1) . Out of these two samples, one donor was sampled at the time of diagnosis, and the 

other donor had discontinued ART about four months prior to biopsy .

To deeply characterize these LN samples, we applied MIBI -TOF to simultaneously image 40 

proteins in the tissue, capturing multiple anatomical regions within each LN, including T cell zones, 

B cell follicles, and germinal centers (Figure S1b). The antibody panel included markers for 

immune cell and stromal lineages, immune cell activation, exhaustion, and inflammation, as well 

as the viral antigen p24 (Figure 1a -b, Figure S2). Following image acquisition, we employed a 

custom computational pipeline to profil e over 1. 7 million cells across the cohort (Figure 1c -d, 

Figure S3, Figure S4a -b). We assigned the cells to 20 different immune and stromal lineages, 

characterized the expression of various functional and inflammatory markers, and mapped the 

spatial relationships be tween these cell types within their native tissue context (Figure S3, 

Methods). Altogether, we created a comprehensive cell atlas of LNs from PWH and PWOH to 

serve as a foundation for investigating virus -associated changes in tissue structure. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1: MIBI -TOF imaging reveals the cellular landscape of lymph nodes from PWH and PWOH 

(a) Study overview. PWH: people with HIV, PWOH: people without HIV. (b) Representative MIBI -TOF 

overlays of a single field -of -view (FOV) (800 μm x 800 μm). (c) Heatmap of cell phenotypes identified across 

the cohort, with identified phenotypes in the rows and markers in the columns. Values were z -score scaled 

for each marker. (d) Corresponding cell phenotype map of FOV shown in b, where single cells are colored 

according to the color bar in c. 

HIV -1 infection shapes CD8+ T cell functional profiles in LNs 

To systematically identify differences between LNs from PWOH ( HIV -) and PWH ( HIV+ ), we 

quantified over 1000 features for each image, encompassing cell density and functional marker 

expression, as well as spatial characteristics including cellular diversity, cellular 

microenvironments, and cell -cell enrichment (Figure 2a, left). Using a mixed -effect model to 

identify the features most enriched in HIV - or HIV+ LNs, w e found that despite varying treatment 

status and viremia levels, HIV+ LNs consistently exhibited fewer CD4+ T cells and more CD8+ T 

cells compared to HIV - LNs (Figure 2a, righ t). The CD4+ to CD8+ T cell ratio perfectly segregated 

donor groups (Figure 2b). Notably, LNs from all PWH displayed a lower CD4+ to CD8+ T cell ratio 

than PWOH , including samples from PWH donors with undetectable plasma viremia and absence 

of tissue p24 staining, suggesting that the presence of virus induces long -lasting changes to LN 

architecture that persist even after viral suppression (Figure 2b). Interestingly, we found that there 

was little correlation between the CD4+ or CD8+ T cell counts in the LN tissues and corresponding 

blood counts measured at the time of tissue sampling (Figure S4c). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Further stratifying the donors by p24 detection in tissues (Figure S5a), we found a significant 

increase (p = 0.00 9) in CD8+ T cell density specifically in LN from PWH where p24 was detected 

in any imaged area of the tissue ( p24+ LNs, Figure 2c). LNs from PWH without detection of p24 

(p24 - LNs) were characterized by an intermediate phenotype between p24+ LNs and HIV - LNs ,

exhibiting a moderate expansion of CD8+ T cells. In parallel, p24+ LNs showed significant CD4+ 

T cell depletion (p = 0.02, Figure S5b). I nterestingly, the most significant feature of HIV - LNs from 

the mixed -effect model was a higher density of TCF1+ CD4+ T cells (Figure S5c) , a cell subset 

th at is associated with stemness and memory cell differentiation 35,36 . In HIV+ LNs, the most 

significant feature was a higher spatial enrichment score between CD11c+ CD14+ myeloid cells 

and CD4+ T cells, indicating that the distribution of these myeloid cells and CD4+ T cells was 

influenced by viral replication (Figure S5d). These data demonstrate that active viral replication, 

as evidenced by p24 expression, is associated with substantial changes in tissue structure in both 

CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations. 

Given the elevated CD8+ T cell counts in HIV+ LNs relative to HIV - control tissues, we 

hypothesized that CD8+ T cells in p24+ versus p24 - LNs would exhibit different inflammatory and 

exhaustion signatures. Surprisingly, we found that a large proportion of the CD8+ T cells lacked 

any of the functional markers associated with immune activation, exhaustion, and inflammation 

included in our panel (CD45 RO, CD69, galectin -9, GLUT1, granzyme B, ICOS, IFN γ , Ki67, LAG3, 

NLRP3, PD1, PDL1, TCF1, TIGIT, TIM3, caspase -1) in p24 - LNs (Figure 2d). In fact, m ost CD8+ 

T cells expressed none or only one of these markers, with few cells expressing multiple markers 

simultaneously. Expectedly, p24+ LNs contained the highest proportion of CD8+ T cells 

expressing one or more of these functional markers, indicating hi gher levels of CD8+ T cell 

activation in response to viral protein expression (Figure 2d). 

Further analysis of activated CD8+ T cells revealed distinct functional patterns across donor 

groups. While not statistically significant, the proportion of CD8+ T cells that expressed the 

cytotoxic molecule granzyme B trended higher in HIV+ LNs, including both p24 - and p24+ tissues, 

suggesting an increase of cytotoxicity regardless of active viral replication (Figure 2e, Figure S5e). 

Notably, we observed a significant increase (p = 0.0 3) in caspase -1+ CD8+ T cells specifically in 

p24+ LNs (Figure 2f, Figur e S5f). While caspase -1 expression is typically associated with 

inflammasome activation and pyroptotic cell death in myeloid cells, its expression in CD8+ T cells 

has been less well characterized. Furthermore, we found that the proportion of granzyme B+ 

caspase -1+ double -positive CD8+ T cells trended higher in p24+ LNs, while granzyme B+ 

caspase -1- CD8+ T cells trended higher in all HIV+ LNs (Figure S5g -j). The expression of other 

markers associated with T cell activation, such as the proliferation marker K i67, memory marker 

CD45RO, effector molecule IFN γ, and checkpoint molecules TIGIT, TIM3, and ICOS, also trended 

higher in CD8+ T cells from p24+ LNs (Figure S5k -l). Interestingly, expression of galectin -9, the 

ligand for TIM3, was also expressed higher in CD8+ T cells from p24+ LN (Figure S5k -l) .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2: Viral replication status shapes CD4+ and CD8+ T cell phenotypes in LNs from PWH 

(a) Overview of feature extraction pipeline. A mixed -effect model was used to test for significance between 

HIV+ and HIV - LNs for all features. (b) The log2 ratio of CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells for all donors. Each 

dot is one FOV. (c) Comparison of CD8+ T cell density in HIV - donors, HIV+ donors where p24 was 

undetectable, and HIV+ donors where p24 was detected in any FOV of the LN from that donor. Each dot is 

one FOV. (d) Breakdown of the proportion of CD8+ T cells that express functional markers. Functi onal 

markers include caspase -1, CD45RO, CD69, galectin -9, GLUT1, granzyme B, ICOS, IFNg, Ki67, LAG3, 

NLRP3, PD1, PDL1, TCF1, TIGIT, TIM3. (e) Comparison of proportion of CD8+ T cells that are positive for 

granzyme B and (f) caspase -1. Representative MIBI -TOF images shown on the right. (g) Comparison of 

the density of CD8+ T cells in the extrafollicular or (h) follicular areas. (i) Two representative FOVs. Top: 

MIBI -TOF images, bottom: cell phenotype maps (gray: follicle area, pink: CD8+ T cells). (j) Normal ized 

median proportion of CD8+ T cells expressing functional markers, inside or outside the follicle area. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To gain deeper insight into the functional implications of the phenotypic differences in CD8+ T 

cells, we analyzed functional marker co -expression patterns. Assessment of the most frequently 

co -expressed functional marker pairs in CD8+ T cells revealed dis tinct differences between donor 

groups (Figure S5m). For example, caspase -1+ CD45RO+ co -expression was dominant in HIV+ 

p24+ LNs and HIV - LNs, while Ki67+ CD45RO+ co -expression was most common in p24 - LNs. 

These data suggest different inflammatory versus p roliferative phenotypes in memory CD8+ T 

cells in LN with active viral replication. While CD8+ T cells in HIV+ p24 - LNs showed co -

expression patterns dominated by CD45RO, CD8+ T cells in p24+ LNs exhibited increased 

checkpoint molecule co -expression. Focus ing on the checkpoint markers, while we found that the 

majority of CD8+ T cells did not express any of these markers, the most common co -expression 

pattern in CD8+ T cells was TIGIT and PD1, followed by cells co -expressing TIM3 and galectin -

9, and TIGIT an d TIM3 (Figure S5n -o). Specifically looking at granzyme B, which was increased 

in all HIV+ LNs, and caspase -1, which was increased in p24+ LNs, we found that both markers 

were highly co -expressed with CD45O (Figure S5p -q). Analysis of granzyme B+ or caspas e-1+ 

CD8+ T cells revealed minimal co -expression with checkpoint markers , suggesting that 

upregulation of these markers i s not concurrent with immune exhaustion in these cells (Figure 

S5r). Together, these findings demonstrate that CD8+ T cells in HIV+ LNs exhibit a spectrum of 

activation states, showing increased inflammatory and exhaustion profiles in p24+ tissues. 

CD8+ T cell infiltration into B cell follicles 

To determine whether the observed CD8+ T cell phenotypes in LNs were associated with 

exclusion from B cell follicles, we analyzed the distribution and phenotype of these cells in 

extrafollicular versus follicular areas. We found an increase in CD8+ T cells in the extrafollicular 

areas of HIV+ LN, which was significantly higher (p = 0.00 3) in p24+ LNs (Figure 2g). Interestingly, 

CD8+ T cell densities were elevated within follicular regions across all HIV+ LNs, with significantly 

higher levels (p = 0.0 3) in p24+ LNs (Figure 2h -i). These data indicated that CD8+ T cells can 

access anatomical compartments previously described to harbor viral reservoirs, regardless of 

active viral replication, but tend to accumulate outside follicles in the absence of suppr ession. 

To further characterize patterns associated with active viral replication, we then analyzed the 

phenotypic differences between CD8+ T cells located in extrafollicular or follicular areas in the 

different donor groups. We confirmed that granzyme B expression was generally higher in HIV+ 

LNs, but particularly in cells located in the extrafollicular areas (Figure 2j) . In contrast, Ki67 and 

CD45RO were higher in p24+ LNs, with minimal differences between follicular and extrafollicular 

areas. Interestingly, the expression of various checkpoint and activation markers, including TIM3, 

PD1, TIGIT, and ICOS, as well as inflammasome markers NLRP3 and caspase -1, were elevated 

in the follicles specifically in p24+ LNs, and low in both p24 - and HIV - LNs. This marker prof ile 

indicates that follicle -infiltrating CD8+ T cells represent activated, proliferating populations that 

may be responding to local antigen presentation or microenvironmental cues. In contrast, CD8+ 

T cells that expressed TCF1, LAG3, GLUT1, IFN γ, and gale ctin -9 were largely excluded from the 

follicles (Figure 2j). Collectively, this data suggests that HIV -1 infection and active viral replication, 

as well as histological localization, affect the activation and exhaustion states of CD8+ T cells. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

CD8+ T cells exhibit distinct spatial niches in HIV+ LNs with active viral replication 

Cellular function is strongly influenced by the characteristics of the local tissue microenvironment. 

To identify differential spatial relationships between HIV - and HIV+ LNs, we used QUICHE, a 

graph -based spatial niche detection method, where niches refer to groups of cell types in close 

proximity in the tissue 37 . Using this unbiased approach without prior specification of CD8+ T cells, 

QUICHE identified spatial relationships involving CD8+ T cells as key distinguishing features of 

HIV+ LNs (Figure 3a). The niche defined by CD8+ T cells nearby other CD8+ T cells sh owed the 

largest mean fold change difference between the HIV+ and HIV - groups, with a higher value in 

the HIV+ group. Furthermore, we found that HIV+ LNs were enriched for CD8+ T cells in close 

proximity to APCs (HLA -DR+, CD11c+, CD14+), fibroblasts, and e ndothelial cells. We confirmed 

this finding using cell enrichment analysis (Figure S6a -b). In contrast, HIV - LNs showed 

enrichment for CD4+ T cell and Tfh cell niches. Interestingly, we found that the significantly 

enriched niches in the HIV+ group were mo stly capturing interactions outside of the follicles, with 

niches containing CD11c+ CD14+ myeloid cells present to a limited extent in the follicles (Figure 

S6c). The most abundant niches within follicles consisted of expected cell types, predominantly 

B c ells, follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), and Tfh cells (Figure S6d). 

Network visualization of the niches discovered by QUICHE revealed that HIV - LNs exhibited 

diverse niches with many connections, as expected in a complex LN structure, whereas HIV+ 

LNs were less diverse and dominated by CD8+ T cells interacting with various myeloid and 

stromal cell types (Figure 3b). Investigating the interactions between CD8+ T cells and myeloid 

populations further, we found that the interactions of CD8+ T cells with CD14+ CD68+ CD163+ 

macrophages, CD14+ monocytes, CD11c+ DCs, and HLA -DR+ A PCs were present in both HIV -

and HIV+ LNs , and i n HIV+ LNs, connections between CD8+ T cells and CD11c+ CD14+ 

monocytes were gained. 

Stratifying the HIV+ population based on p24 positivity, we found that cells belonging to the 

significantly enriched niches in the HIV+ group, defined as having a spatial FDR less than 0.05 

(Figure 3a), were present at higher frequencies in p24+ LNs compar ed to p24 - LNs (Figure 3c). 

When we examined the two p24+ donors separately, we found that cells in these significant HIV+ 

niches were most abundant in the donor with ART interruption (Figure S6e). This suggests that 

viral reactivation of the HIV -1 reservo ir following ART interruption is a primary driver of the 

observed changes in CD8+ T cell and myeloid interactions discovered using QUICHE. 

Investigating the functional profile of the cells belonging to the differentially significant niches in 

LNs from the HIV+ group, we found that these cells expressed higher levels of activation markers 

such as CD45RO and Ki67 (Figure 3d). To further investi gate caspase -1+ CD8+ T cells, which 

we found were elevated in p24+ LNs, we examined their spatial distribution. We found that these 

cells showed preferential clustering , being located closer to other caspase -1+ CD8+ T cells than 

to caspase -1- CD8+ T cells, suggesting potential feedback mechanisms that promote local 

activation (Figure S6f). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3: Spatial analysis identifies distinct CD8+ T cell niches associated with HIV -1 infection and 

active viral replication 

(a) Violin plots show the top differentially enriched niche neighborhoods within HIV - (blue) or HIV+ (red) LN 

samples as identified using QUICHE. Niches were filtered for median logFC > 1 or < -1 and median Spatial 

FDR < 0.05. (b) Niche networks for differ entially enriched niches in HIV - (left) or HIV+ (right) samples. 

Nodes represent cell types and edge weights correspond to the number of unique samples with the 

corresponding interaction. Node size is proportional to connectedness, as measured by eigenvect or 

centrality. (c) Comparison of the density of cells in the significant niches in the HIV+ samples broken down 

by p24 positivity. (d) Comparison of the proportion of CD8+ T cells that are positive for functional markers 

between significant niches in the H IV+ group, significant niches in the HIV - group, and all other niches. (e) 

Left: Heatmap showing the contribution of each cell type to the CD8+ T microenvironments (MEs). Right: 

Proportion of CD8+ T cells in each ME that are positive for functional markers . Values were column 

normalized. (f) Representative MIBI -TOF overlay and corresponding ME map, where colors correspond to 

the color bar in e (gray are cells that are not CD8+ T cells). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

While QUICHE allowed us to find differentially significant spatial relationships, we found that many 

of the significant niches were highly enriched in the donor who had interrupted ART (Figure S6 e). 

Furthermore, QUICHE downsamples the total number of cells for the analysis. To classify all 

CD8+ T cells based on their local neighborhoods and capture broad patterns of CD8+ T cell spatial 

organization, we identified CD8+ T cell microenvironments (MEs) by clustering CD8+ T cells 

according to their local neighbo rhood composition (Figure S6g -i). This analysis revealed four 

distinct MEs (Figure 3e -f). ME 1, characterized by CD8+ T cells surrounded by CD4+ T cells, 

including regulatory T cells (Tregs), was expectedly highest in HIV - LNs (Figure S6j). ME 1 was 

more e nriched for CD8+ T cells expressing TCF1 and CD69 (Figure 3e). ME 2 CD8+ T cells were 

surrounded by other CD8+ T cells and were characterized by low levels of granzyme B and IFN γ, 

and high levels of CD45RO, PDL1, and galectin -9 (Figure 3e) . This implies th at aggregation of 

CD8+ T cells may modulate activation of adjacent T cells. We found that ME 2 was most abundant 

in LNs from p24+ tissues (Figure S6j) , complementing our previous findings that p24+ donors 

displayed changes in CD8+ T cell activation and exhaustion. CD8+ T cells in ME 3 tended to be 

higher in both HIV+ groups and were located near various myeloid and stromal cells, often outside 

follicles. These cells expressed high levels of IFN γ, granzyme B, and Ki67, while having lower 

levels of TIGIT and caspase -1 than cells in ME 2. Finally, ME 4 CD8+ T cells were surrounded by 

B cells and FDCs, indicating that the CD8+ T cells infiltrating the follicle were in this cluster. This 

ME was most frequent in p24 - LNs (Figure S6j). 

Comparing the QUICHE niches with these CD8+ T cell MEs revealed that they capture 

complementary information (Figure S6k). As expected, the niche defined by CD8+ T cell -to -CD8+ 

T cell interactions consisted primarily of ME 2 cells, the ME characterized by C D8+ T cells 

surrounded by other CD8+ T cells. Interestingly, many other niches also contained cells from this 

ME, indicating that the MEs capture broader organizational patterns that complement the more 

specific cellular relationships identified by QUICHE. 

Collectively, these analyses reveal that HIV -1 infection reshapes LN architecture, creating spatial 

niches dominated by clusters of CD8+ T cells with each other, in addition to CD8+ T cells in close 

association with myeloid and stromal populations. Such re modeling, particularly pronounced 

during viral activation, suggests that CD8+ T cells are recruited and activated at sites of persistent 

HIV -1 replication. 

CD56+ NK cells are depleted in HIV+ LNs 

In the QUICHE spatial analysis, we found that many differentially expressed niches in the HIV -

group involved CD56+ NK cells (Figure 3a -b). Given that NK cells are important effector immune 

cells involved in HIV -1 control and have been shown to respond rap idly in early infection 38,39 , we 

investigated NK cells in this cohort further. Although CD56+ NK cells composed a small 

percentage of all cells identified (0.8 6%), we found that they were depleted in HIV+ LNs, 

particularly in p24+ LNs (Figure S7a -c). Assessing the functional profile of these CD56+ NK cells, 

we found that Ki67 positivity was elevated in HIV - LNs and decreased in HIV+ LN. In contrast, 

there was hig her detection of vimentin+ NK cells in p24+ LNs (Figure S7d), potentially contributing 

to functional suppression of these ce lls 40,41 . We also found that granzyme B trended higher in 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

CD56+ NK cells from p24 - LNs, while caspase -1 expression was lower. Investigating the co -

expression patterns of granzyme B and caspase -1 further, we found that both markers had the 

highest co -expression with TIM3 and Ki67 (Figure S7e) .

Assessing their localization in the tissue, we found that CD56+ NK cells were mostly located 

outside the follicles and displayed largely positive spatial enrichment scores with CD4+ T cells, 

though this enrichment score did not vary significantly between donor groups (Figure S7f -h). We 

also found a positive enrichment score with CD8+ T cells, which was slightly elevated in p24 - LNs. 

In contrast, there was a decrease in the enrichment of CD11c+ CD68+ macrophages around 

CD56+ NK cells in p24+ LNs (Figure S7h) . Taken together, these findings indicate that CD56+ 

NK cells are less frequent in tissue during viral activation and exhibit distinct functional states 

characterized by reduced proliferation and altered cytotoxic marker expression. 

Distinct immune microenvironments surround areas of active viral replication 

Next, we asked how the immune microenvironment was remodeled around detected HIV -1 p24 

signal, which reflects areas with active viral replication. To this end, we investigated the 

differences between individual follicles from the two PWH with strong p24 detection, one donor 

who was treatment -naïve and one donor with discontinued ART. Th is within -donor analysis 

allowed us to compare the characteristics of follicles in the same tissue while controlling for donor -

specific factors. In the same LN, we found that some follicles showed strong p24 staining, while 

other follicles were negative fo r p24, demonstrating the heterogeneous nature of viral replication 

within LNs (Figure 4a, Figure S5a). Surprisingly, Tfh cells, which have previously been reported 

to be a major reservoir, showed no consistent trend between p24+ and p24 - follicles, reflecting 

the complex role of these cells as reservoirs and in immune res ponses (Figure 4b). However, we 

did observe reduced numbers of Tregs and other CD4+ T cells in p24+ follicles (Figure 4b) .

Additionally, p24+ follicles exhibited higher mean expression of Ki67 and CD86, indicating 

increased immune activation (Figure 4c). We found that B cells expressed the highest levels of 

Ki67 (Figure S8a). CD8+ T cells also expressed higher levels of Ki67 i n p24+ follicles compared 

to p24 - follicles from the same LN (Figure S8b). We found that CD11c+ CD68+ macrophages had 

the highest expression of CD86, and various myeloid populations, including CD11c+ CD68+ 

macrophages, HLA -DR+ APCs, and CD11c+ DCs, express ed higher levels of CD86 in p24+ 

follicles (Figure S8c -d). These data indicate that there is localized activation in the myeloid 

compartment in response to viral replication in both the untreated and ART -interrupted settings, 

rather than having a systemic effect throughout the entire LN. 

We then assessed the microenvironment around the detected p24 signal to assess how infection 

affects the local cellular neighborhood around the site of active viral replication (Figure S8e). 

Analysis of p24+ cells revealed distinct spatial associations dep ending on treatment status, 

suggesting that the cellular microenvironment around infected cells differs based on the host 

immune state and treatment history (Figure S8f -g). In the treatment -naïve donor, p24+ cells were 

more proximal to Tfh cells and CD11c+ myeloid cells (Figure 4d). In contrast, in the donor who 

had discontinued ART, p24+ cells were closer to FDCs and CD8+ T cells (Figure 4e). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4: Active viral replication shapes distinct immune microenvironments in treatment -naive 

versus treatment -interrupted LNs 

(a) Representative example of p24+ FOV. Top inset: p24 antibody staining. Bottom inset: p24+ cells in red, 

other cells in gray. (b) Comparison of Tfh cells, Tregs, and other CD4+ T cells in p24 - vs p24+ follicles. 

Colors correspond to the two different p24 + donors. Each dot is one follicle. Lines connect the medians of 

the two donors. (c) Comparison of mean Ki67 and CD86 expression in p24 - vs p24+ follicles. (d -e) 

Comparison of Tfh, CD11c+ DC, FDC, and CD8+ T cell density as a function of distance from p24+ cells. 

Lines represent the mean and shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. (f) Distribution of 

enrichment score between p24+ cells and other cell types. Each dot is one FOV. Enrichment scores were 

calculated by comparing the number of cell -cell contacts compared to a null distribution. To construct a null 

distribution, we use a bootstrapping approach by selectively randomizing the location of the cell populations 

of interest, calculating pairwise enrichment, and repeating this process 100 times. 

We further performed an enrichment analysis, in which we determined which cell types were 

closest to the p24+ cells by comparing against a randomized null distribution to control for total 

cell numbers (Figure S6a). Surprisingly, enrichment analysis showed that CD8+ T cells were 

farther from p24+ cells than expected by random chance. This analysis supports the distance 

analysis shown in Figure 4e, which shows that the distance of CD8+ T cells to p24+ cells peaks 

at around 200 -300 μm. Linking this enrichment analysis to our previous finding that caspase -1+ 

CD8+ T cells were associated with p24+ LNs, we assessed the enrichment of caspase -1- and 

caspase -1+ CD8+ T cells around p24+ signal. We found that caspase -1+ CD8+ T cells were 

significantly more enriched, t hough both enrichment scores were negative indicating farther 

distances than would be expected by random chance (Figure S8h). We found that CD8+ T cells 

expressing the checkpoint markers TIGIT and PD1 were closer to p24+ cells in the untreated 

sample but n ot in the setting of ART interruption, whereas we observed higher levels of GLUT1 

in the setting of ART interruption, suggesting metabolic reprograming in CD8 + T cells from these 

tissues (Figure S8g). In contrast to the negative enrichment score of CD8+ T cells around p24+ 

cells, we found that p24+ cells had positive enrichment scores with FDCs, CD11c+CD68+ 

macrophages, and Tfh cells (Figure 4f). This spatial segregation indicates that de spite increased 

CD8+ T cells in LNs from p24+ donors suggesting immune activation, these effector cells do not 

directly access sites of active viral reactivation, which tend to cluster near FDCs. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5: Viral suppression is associated with altered myeloid populations and reduced 

inflammasome activation 

(a) Normalized mean cell density of various cell populations in viremic, aviremic, and HIV - donors. Aviremic 

donors are donors where the virus was undetectable in plasma. (b) Comparison of proportion of CD11c+ 

cells that are positive for functional markers . (c) Comparison of density of NLRP3+caspase -1+ cells. (d) 

Representative MIBI -TOF images. 

Altered immune networks in LNs from aviremic PWH donors 

Since most PWH achieve viremic suppression on ART, we specifically examined features most 

prominent in aviremic donors with undetectable plasma viral loads to understand the 

immunological landscape that characterizes successfully treated HIV -1 infection. W e found that 

LNs from donors with suppressed plasma viremia contained higher numbers of B cells and fewer 

myeloid cells, including reduced CD11c+ dendritic cells, CD11c+CD14+ monocytes, and 

CD11c+CD68+ macrophages, when compared to tissue from PWH with det ectable plasma 

viremia (Figure 5a). Interestingly, in these cell populations, LNs from viremic PWH more closely 

resembled LNs from PWOH. This shift in cellular composition suggests that viral suppression 

leads to a marked reduction in myeloid cell populations below even levels in HIV - LN, while B cell 

populations were elevated. Despite increased B cell numbers, these cells showed reduced 

proliferative activity (Figure S9a -b). Consistent with increased B cells, LNs from donors with 

suppressed plasma viremia showed the highest levels of CD8+ T cells in ME 4, which is 

composed of CD8+ T cells surrounded by B cells and FDCs (Figure S9c -d). 

Interestingly, the inflammasome markers caspase -1 and NLRP3 were lowest in the aviremic 

group and elevated in tissue from viremic individuals (Figure 5 b-d). Investigating these markers 

further, out of all cells expressing either caspase -1 or NLRP3, only 4% of these cells co -expressed 

both markers (Figure S9e). The majority of inflammasome -positive cells were myeloid cells, and 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

in particular cells that expressed CD11c (Figure S9f). Among all cells that expressed CD11c, the 

proportion expressing both NLRP3 and caspase -1 was reduced in the aviremic group, indicating 

reduced inflammasome activation in APCs during viral suppression (Figure S 9g) . Interestingly, 

we found a large proportion of cells that expressed caspase -1 and not NLRP3, suggesting a role 

for caspase -1 activation independent of NLRP3 (Figure S9h -i). This data shows that viral 

suppression leads to a dampening of inflammatory pathways in aviremic donors, even below HIV -

levels, suggesting a potential association of the inflammasome with immune responses against 

the v irus. 

Altogether, this data shows that despite successful viral suppression in the plasma, the LN 

immune landscape is fundamentally altered, characterized by expanded B cell populations, 

reduced myeloid populations , and dampened inflammasome signaling. 

Discussion 

In this study, we developed a spatial map of the cellular networks present in human LNs in HIV -1

infection, covering the spectrum of acute infection, successful viral suppression with ART, and 

viral reactivation due to ART interruption. Our findings reveal a paradoxical landscape of CD8+ T 

cell responses in HIV+ LNs. While we observed significant expansion of CD8+ T cells in HIV+ 

tissues, and to a greater extent in p24+ LNs, a substantial proportion of these cells lacked 

expression of canonical markers for activation, exhaustion, or effector function. This finding 

suggests that many CD8+ T cells may be recruited to LNs through non -specific inflammatory 

signals rather than antigen -driven activation. This interpretation is compatible with early reports 

of infl ammatory signals such as MIP -1a mediating lymphocyte attraction to LNs 42 , although other 

studies reported an increase in proportions of memory CD45RO+ CD8+ T cells, rather than naive 

cells 43 . Supporting the trafficking of CD8+ T cells to LNs, we found that CD8+ T cells were 

preferentially enriched near stromal cells and endothelial cells, suggesting that tissue -derived 

chemotactic signals may drive their recruitment and retention. Importantly, this pattern persists 

even in people on suppressive ART with undetectable plasma viremia, suggesting that conserved 

inflammato ry signals continue to drive CD8+ T cell accumulation during chronic HIV -1 infection 

despite systemic viral suppression. 

In the last few years, accumulating evidence suggests that the ability of CD8+ T cells to infiltrate 

into B cell follicles while retaining cytotoxic markers and proliferative capacity may be associated 

with spontaneous control of HIV -1 infection 28,44 . In addition, studies in both primate and human 

tissue have shown that viral infection and ART initiation affect the recruitment of memory CD8+ T 

cells and expression of Th1 responses such as IFN γ, Tbet and the expression of tolerogenic 

markers such as Foxp 329,45,46 . In our study, we expanded current knowledge to further 

characterize the phenotype of CD8+ T cells in follicular areas. Infiltrated cells closer to p24+ cells 

in follicular areas have been recently described to downregulate expression of granzyme B, 

potent ially due to interaction of NKG2A with HLA -E in these areas 47 . In addition, previous studies 

have suggested that ligands for PD1 (PDL1) and TIGIT (PVR) are differentially expressed in HIV+ 

LNs and could participate in the modulation of CD8+ T cells in tissue 48 . Here, we have shown that 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

inhibitory signals, including the ligands for checkpoint receptors such as galectin -9, are enriched 

in microenvironments characterized by CD8+ T cells interacting with other CD8+ T cells. 

Furthermore, while we have confirmed infiltration of CD8+ T cells in to follicles, we found that they 

had a negative spatial enrichment score around p24+ cells. This suggests that despite 

overcoming anatomical barriers to follicular entry, CD8+ T cells may not efficiently engage infected 

cells at the sites of viral reactiva tion. 

A key finding of our study is that despite similar follicular infiltration of CD8+ T cells in both p24 -

and p24+ LNs, the functional profile of these cells is different. CD8+ T cells inside the follicles in 

p24+ LNs were characterized by higher levels of caspase -1 and checkpoint markers PD1, TIGIT, 

and TIM3. Higher PD1 expression had previously been observed in tissue resident memory (Trm) -

like CD8+ T cells exp ressing CD69 in tonsil tissue from HIV+ individuals 49 . In contrast, we found 

that CD8+ T cells displaying higher levels of LAG3, GLUT1, and IFN γ accumulated outside of 

follicles in p24+ LN. These findings are in line with previous studies that suggest that defective 

glycolysis and antiviral function are assoc iated with differential patterns of TIM3 versus TIGIT 

expression on CD8+ T cells from PWH 19 . In addition, higher TIGIT and LAG3 expression have 

been described to be more enriched in CD8+ T cells in tissue from HIV -1 chronic progressors 

compared to elite controller individuals 44 .

In addition to the functional phenotype of CD8+ T cells, our study addresses the relationships with 

innate pathways that may be relevant to chronic inflammation in HIV+ LNs 50 –52 . We observed an 

enrichment in myeloid cells expressing inflammasome NLRP3 and caspase -1 in LNs from viremic 

individuals, which is consistent with previous studies that have suggested that inflammasome 

activation in macrophages contributes to non -AIDS inflammatory disorders 53 . We found that 

caspase -1 expression is enriched in CD11c+ cells, suggesting that DCs may play a key role 

modulating inflammation in tissue. In addition, our data suggests that a proportion of caspase -1+ 

cells are not from myeloid origin, particularly CD8+ T cells. In this regard, NLRP3 inflammasome 

has been shown to potentially regulate tissue -resident CD8+ T cells in lupus nephritis, and its role 

in HIV -1 infection warrants further investigation 54 . The elevated expression of caspase -1

independent of NLRP3 in CD8+ T cells from p24+ tissues suggests potential alternative 

inflammasome pathways that may affect the function of these cells. In addition to NLRP3, 

increased expression of alternative inflammasome sensors induced by viral replication in CD4+ T 

cells has been reported in PWH 55 , but their implication in CD8+ T cells remains to be explored. 

Conversely, the marked reduction in inflammasome signaling in aviremic donors, even below 

levels observed in HIV - controls, indicates that successful viral suppression may be achieved in 

part by decreasing the activity of myeloid cells . Notably, our study included a viral protein marker. 

However, the HIV -1 reservoir is heterogeneous and some infected cells, particularly in tissue, may 

express viral mRNA that is not translated into protein 7. Sensing of HIV -1 mRNA products has been 

associated with activation of inflammasomes other than NLRP3 in myeloid cells 56 . Therefore, 

differences in myeloid distribution and inflammasome activation observed in p24 - LN that differ 

from PWOH could be attributed to viral RNA sensing and further studies including detection of 

HIV -1 mRNA would be needed to validate this hypothesis. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In our study, we found that tissue p24 signal was located near FDCs in germinal centers, in 

agreement with previous studies 29,57,58 . Our findings suggest that FDCs may contribute to the 

latent reservoir that is being reactivated in the setting of ART interruption, while Tfh cells may 

account for viral spreading in acute infection. Our observation that viral activation, particularly 

following ART interruption, occurs preferentially in proximity to FDCs has important implications 

for understanding HIV -1 persistence. FDCs are known to trap and present antigens for e xtended 

periods 58 –60 , and their location within germinal centers may provide an immunologically privileged 

microenvironment that supports viral persistence. However, these findings are based on analysis 

of tissue from two donors and therefore additional validation in larger cohorts with similar 

treatment histories is required .

An additional aspect of this study that has not been explored is how the phenotype and distribution 

of other immune cells not targeted in our panel may be relevant, such as CD56 - NK cells, and 

how they may vary with active or suppressed viral replication. Recent studies suggest that 

expression of HLA -E is associated with dysfunctional CD8+ T cells in HIV+ LN 47 . Taking into 

consideration that this molecule is a ligand of the inhibitory NKG2A and activating NKG2C 

receptors expressed by NK cells, additional studies should be conducted to further address 

changes in specific NK cell subsets in human HIV+ LN. 

An important caveat from the study is that all donors, both HIV+ and HIV -, had lymphadenopath ies 

that were suspected for cancer . Lymph nodes are rare ly removed from healthy donors, and we 

tried to select for pathologies that would result in minimal immune alterations ( no metastatic cells 

were found in any of the analyzed samples ). However, the immune landscape of these donors 

may be influenced by systemic immune responses, and therefore additional validation studies 

performed in tissue from donors who do not have pathologies associated with immune activation 

should be performed. 

These findings have important implications for HIV -1 cure strategies. The persistence of altered 

immune architecture even during successful viral suppression suggests that tissue -level 

interventions may be necessary to restore normal immune function. The s patial segregation of 

CD8+ T cells from sites of viral activation highlights potential limitations of current 

immunotherapeutic approaches and suggests that strategies to enhance CD8+ T cell trafficking 

to, or retention at, sites of viral persistence may b e necessary for effective reservoir clearance. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Methods 

Tissue cohort 

We obtained LN tissue from five PWH and five PWOH from the Pathology Anatomy Unit at 

Hospital Universitario La Princesa (Madrid, Spain) in collaboration with Dr. Magdalena Adrados 

de Llano. The tissues used in the study were obtained from paraffin -fixed tissue sample blocks 

previous ly obtained for clinical analyses under an informed consent (Register No. 3518) approved 

by Hospital La Princesa’s Bioethical committee. All selected LN blocks had no metastatic 

infiltration . We match ed sex and age between PWH an d PWOH. Further clinical characteristics 

of the different samples can be found in Supplementary Table 1. 

Panel construction 

Most antibodies used in this study were previously validated for MIBI -TOF 61 –65 . Newly selected 

target antibodies used for this study were validated via immunohistochemistry to confirm 

appropriate specific staining in control tissues (Figure S2a). All antibodies were metal -labeled 

using the Ionpath conjugation kit according to the ma nufacturer’s protocol. Calprotectin and mast 

cell tryptase were conjugated to Ga69 and Ga71 respectively using monomeric maleimido -mono -

amide NOTA. To prevent degradation and prolong shelf life, labeled antibodies were lyophilized 

individually with 100 mM trehalose in 1 μg or 5 μg aliquots. Titer optimization for new targets was 

performed using serial dilutions (1 μg/mL, 0.5 μg/mL, 0.25 μg/mL, and 0.125 μg/mL) or the 

recommended titer for previously validated MIBI -TOF antibodies. The full panel can be found in 

Supplementary Table 2. 

MIBI -TOF staining 

Tissues were sectioned (5 μm section thickness) from tissue blocks on gold -sputtered slides. 

Slides were baked at 70°C overnight, followed by deparaffinization and rehydration with washes 

in xylene (3 x), 100% ethanol (2 x), 95% ethanol (2 x), 80% ethanol (1 x), 70% ethanol (1 x) and 

ddH2O with a Leica ST4020 Linear Stainer (Leica Biosystems). Tissues next underwent antigen 

retrieval by submerging sides in 3 -in -1 Target Retrieval Solution (pH 9, DAKO Agilent) and 

incubating at 97°C for 40 min in a Lab Vision PT Module (Thermo Fis her Scient ific). After cooling 

to room temperature, slides were washed in 1 x PBS IHC Washer Buffer with Tween 20 (Cell 

Marque) with 0.1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (Thermo Fisher). Next, all tissues underwent two 

rounds of blocking, the first to block endogenous biotin and avidin with an Avidin/Biotin Blocking 

Kit (BioLegend). Tis sues were then mounted onto a Sequenza system, washed with wash buffer, 

and blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 1× TBS IHC Wash Buffer with Tween 20 with 3% 

(v/v) normal donkey serum (S igma -Aldrich), 0.1% (v/v) cold fish skin gelatin (Sigma -Aldrich), 0.1% 

(v/v) Triton X -100, and 0.05% (v/v) Sodium Azide. The first antibody cocktail was prepared in 1 x

TBS IHC Wash Buffer with Tween 20 with 3% (v/v) normal donkey serum (Sigma -Aldrich) and 

filtered through a 0.1 -μm centrifugal filter (Millipore) prior to incubation with tissue overnight at 4 

°C in the Sequenza. Following the overnight incubation, slides were washed twice for 5 min in 

wash buffer. The second day, an antibody cocktail was prep ared as described and incubated with 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the tissues for 1 h at 4°C. Following staining, slides were washed twice for 5 min in wash buffer 

and fixed in a solution of 2% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences) solution in low -

barium PBS for 5 min. Slides were washed in PBS (1 x), 0.1 M Tris at pH 8.5 (3 x) and ddH2O (2 x)

and then dehydrated by washing in 70% ethanol (1 x), 80% ethanol (1 x), 95% ethanol (2 x) and 

100% ethanol (2 x). Slides were dried under vacuum prior to imaging. 

Detailed protocols can be found at the links below: 

Reagent preparation: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bhmej43e 

IHC staining: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bf6ajrae 

MIBI staining: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.dm6gprk2dvzp/v5 

Sequenza staining: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bmc6k2ze 

Antibody lyophilization: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bhmgj43w 

Lyophilized antibody reconstitution: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjd6ki9e 

MIBI -TOF imaging 

All MIBI data was generated on a commercial MIBIScope instrument (IonPath, Menlo Park, USA). 

For each LN tissue, we used paired IHC or H&E images to identify the fields -of -view (FOVs) that 

would be acquired on MIBI, sampling from the various regions of the LN (Figure S1b). Prior to 

imaging, the slides were sputtered with 10 nm of gold to help with uniform imaging. We used the 

same settings across all MIBI data acquired in this study. To pre -raster the gold coat before image 

acquisition, we used a setting of 40 nA and a dwell time of 0.25 ms for each FOV. For image 

acquisition, the size of each FOV was 800 μm x 800 μm / 2048 pixels x 2048 pixels. We used the 

“Coarse” settings on the MIBIScope instrument. Between all runs , we conducted an imaging test 

on the molybdenum and PMMA standards per the manufacturer’s recommendations and settings. 

We used the autogain feature on the MIBIScope instrument to automatically adjust the detector 

gain during a run. To minimize image artif acts from instrument drift, we randomized the acquisition 

order of the FOVs . All default image processing (background correction and denoising) were 

disabled. 

Image compensation with Rosetta 

Low -level processing of the MIBI -TOF images was conducted with our publicly available, in -house 

pipeline, Toffy (https://github.com/angelolab/toffy ). Following image extraction, we removed 

sources of signal contamination using a compensation method called Rosetta. This approach 

implements channel -by -channel and pixel -by -pixel image compensation based on defined rates 

of signal contamination provided from the manufacturer (IonPath, Menlo Park, CA) and 

experimentally determined. The coefficients we used for subtraction were determined manually 

by image inspection. The source and target channels, as well as the coefficients used for 

subtraction can be fo und in Supplementary Table 3. 

Cell segmentation and classification 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We used Mesmer to segment all images in the cohort 66 . Mesmer is a pre -trained deep learning 

model that takes two channels of input data, a nuclear channel and a membrane channel. We 

used the HH3/dsDNA marker as the nuclear channel, and combined the HLA -I, CD45, and CD31 

markers as the membrane channel. We th en ran Mesmer using the default parameters as part of 

our publicly available, in -house pipeline, ark -analysis ( https://github.com/angelolab/ark -analysis ). 

Representative images of the resulting segmentation can be found in Figure S3a. 

Using ark -analysis ( v0.8.0), we performed pixel clustering using Pixie, a clustering algorithm 

optimized for multiplexed image data 67 . We used the following parameters: blur_factor = 2 and 

subset_proportion = 0.1. We used these phenotypic markers for clustering: Calprotectin, CD3e, 

CD4, CD8a, CD11c, CD14, CD20, CD21, CD31, CD45, CD56, CD68, CD163, CXCR5, FOXP3, 

HLADR, MastCellTryptase, P D1, SMA. We initially over -clustered the data into 200 clusters which 

were then combined into 41 meta -clusters using consensus hierarchical clustering and manual 

adjustments by examining the heatmap of marker expression in each cluster. We next determined 

the proportion of each pixel cluster in each segmented cell object. These profiles were then used 

to cluster cells, first over clustered into 200 clusters and then combined into 20 metaclusters using 

consensus hierarchical clustering and manual adjustment s. To confirm accurate clustering and 

correct systemic instances of inaccurate assignment , we inspected the clusters in Mantis 

Viewer 68 .

We used Nimbus to refine cell type assignments and determine functional marker expression 

status 69 . Nimbus is a deep learning model that predicts marker positivity from multiplexed imaging 

data. Nimbus generates a confidence score for each marker in every cell, indicating the likelihood 

of marker expression in that cell. Using these Nimbus scores, we re assigned cells in the “Other” 

and “Unassigned” clusters that had high scores for lineage markers. These thresholds were 

determined empirically by inspecting the images and Nimbus scores. To confirm accurate 

clustering and correct systemic instances of ina ccurate assignment , we inspected the clusters in 

Mantis Viewer. We then manually evaluated Nimbus scores to establish marker -specific 

thresholds for classifying cells as positive or negative for each functional marker. These 

thresholds can be found in Supplementary Table 4. 

Lymph node region masks 

To create masks of the follicular and extrafollicular areas, we used a combination of the MIBI -TOF 

images of CD21 and Ki67. We Gaussian blurred the images using a large sigma (100) and used 

Otsu thresholding to binarize the images. These images were then m anually adjusted in ImageJ 

and combined to create follicular masks. Extrafollicular masks were created by subtracting the 

follicular mask from the total tissue area. Because MIBI -TOF is performed on gold slides, we used 

the signal from the gold channel tha t is acquired by the instrument to identify regions of empty 

slide. By subtracting out regions of empty slide from each image, we calculated the total tissue 

area in each image. 

Feature extraction pipeline and mixed -effect model 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To systematically compare HIV+ and HIV - LNs, we extracted a total of 1189 features for each 

image. These features included cell density, cell ratios, functional marker expression, cellular 

microenvironments, cell -cell enrichment scores, and neighborhood di versity. For cell density, we 

counted the number of each cell type in each image, then divided the count by total tissue area 

in the image 70 . We also performed this cell density calculation for each cell population specifically 

in the follicular or extrafollicular regions using the masks generated as described above. For cell 

ratios, we calculated the ratio of various cell populations, includin g CD4+ T cells to CD8+ T cells, 

Tregs to total CD4+ T cells, and total T cells to total myeloid cells. For functional marker 

expression, we determined thresholds for positivity using the Nimbus scores by manual 

inspection. Using these thresholds, we calculated the proportion of each cell type that was positive 

for each functional marke r, as well as the cell density of each functional marker -positive cell type. 

We also calculated the mean expression of each of the functional markers in each cell population 

for every image. For cellular microenvironments, we used the Spatial -LDA algorithm , an 

adaptation of the topic modeling method latent Dirichlet allocation for finding spatial patterns of 

cells in tissue 71 . Spatial -LDA was implemented as described previously, with spatial radius r = 100 

μm, and microenvironment number of n = 6. The microenvironment number was determined 

empirically using the metrics inertia and Silhouette score 62,71 . For the cell -cell enrichment scores, 

we used an approach as previously described, in which we compared the number of observed 

cell -cell contacts with a randomized null distribution 63 . For every image, for each pair of cell 

populations X and Y, the number of times Y cells within a 20 μm radius of X cells was counted. A 

null distribution was produced by performing 100 bootstrap permutations where the location of Y 

cells was randomized in the image and the number of X -Y contacts was counted in the 

randomized image. The number of true X -Y contacts was then compared against this null 

distribution to generate a z -score. For neighborhood diversity, for each cell, we counted the 

number of each cell type in a radius of 50 pixels around that cell, then computed the Shannon 

Diversity Index, a popular metric in ecology, to quantify the heterogeneity of the local cellular 

microenvironment. Then we found the average Shannon Diversity Index for each c ell population 

in each image. 

To test for differences between HIV+ and HIV - LNs, we used a mixed -effect model to control for 

multiple images from the same LN. The fixed effect was HIV+ or HIV -, while the random effect 

was the donor to account for person -to -person variability. We used t he nlme package in R. We 

also calculated Cohen’s d, the standardized effect size, for each feature. P -values were generated 

using the mixed -effect model. 

QUantitative InterCellular nicHe Enrichment (QUICHE) spatial analysis 

To test for differences in cellular organization across conditions (i.e. HIV - vs HIV+ LNs), we 

performed spatial statistical differential abundance testing using QUICHE 

(https://github.com/jranek/quiche )37 . Briefly, we identified local cellular niches within each image 

according to spatial proximity by enumerating the number of each cell type within a set radius 

(radius = 200 pixels), performed distribution -focused downsampling to select a subset of niches 

(niches = 50,000) from each sample for condition comparisons, and constructed a niche similarity 

graph for differential enrichment testing (n_neighbors = 30, min_cell_threhsold = 3, k_sim = 100). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUICHE niche neighborhoods were considered significant if spatial false discovery rate (FDR) < 

0.05. 

CD8+ T microenvironment analysis 

To classify all CD8+ T cells based on their local neighborhood, for each CD8+ T cell, we 

enumerated the number of each cell type within a 50 pixel radius. Using these counts as the 

feature vector for each CD8+ T cell, we used k -means clustering to cluster the cells into four 

microenvironment clusters. The number of clusters was determined empirically using inertia and 

Silhouette score, and by manual inspection of cluster heatmaps. 

p24+ follicle analysis 

From the two PWH donors that showed positive p24 staining in any imaged area of the LN, we 

classified each follicle in all images from these donors as p24+ or p24 - based on detectable p24 

staining within the follicle. We determined the threshold for p24 po sitivity using Nimbus scores 

and manual inspection of images. We then assessed the differences between the p24+ and p24 -

follicles. 

To assess the neighborhood around p24+ signal as a function of distance, we counted the number 

of each cell type in 50 μm increments around the center cell that showed p24 positivity, from 0 

μm to 500 μm (i.e. 0 μm - 50 μm, 50 μm - 100 μm, etc.). These cou nts were then normalized by 

the area of each window. We also found the proportion of CD8+ T cells that were expressing 

functional markers in each of these windows. 

For the enrichment analysis, we used the same approach as described above 63 , in which we 

compared the number of observed contacts between p24+ signal and all cell types with a 

randomized null distribution. For every image, for each cell population X, the number of times X 

cells within a 20 μm radius of p24+ signal was counted. A null distribution was produced by 

performing 100 bootstrap permutations where the location of X cells was randomized in the image 

and the number of contacts was counted in the randomized image. The number of true contacts 

was then compared against this nul l distribution to generate a z -score. For FDCs, cells were only 

randomized within the follicle mask. 

Figure generation 

Figures were produced using Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Photoshop, and BioRender. 

Data availability 

Imaging data and metadata are deposited in the BioImage Archive at  https://doi.org/10.6019/S -

BIAD2864 .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Code availability 

Code us ed to perform analyses and generate figures are available at 

https://github.com/angelolab/publications/tree/main/2026 -Liu_Calvet -Mirabent_etal_HIV -LN .

Acknowledgements 

C.C.L. was supported by grant no. NIAID F31AI165180 and the Stanford Graduate Fellowship. 

M.C.M. was supported by La Caixa Banking Foundation ETI -CureHIV (HR20 -00218), Boehringer 

Ingelheim Fonds Travel grant, Asociación Red de Investigación En Sida (RIS) and CFAR 

Mentored Scientist Award (CA -0259646) . M.A. was supported by NIH grant nos. 

5U54CA20997105, 1R01CA24063801A1, 5R01AG06827902, 5UH3CA24663303, 

5R01CA22952904, 1U24CA22430901, 5R01AG05791504, 5R01AG05628705, 

5U24CA22430903, 3U54HL165445 -03S1, 5R01AG05628705, 5R01AG05791505; the 

Department of Defe nse grant nos. W81XWH2110143, 5U54CA261719 -05. E.M.G was supported 

by the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación RETOS, Generación de conocimiento and 

consolidation programs (PID2021 -127899OB -I00; CNS2023 -144841; PID2024 -160973OB -I00), 

GLD24/00117 grant from Gilead biosciences, La Caixa Banking Foundation ETI -CureHIV (HR20 -

00218) and infectious diseases CIBER from ISCIII (CB21/13/00107). 

Declaration of interests 

M.A. and S.C.B. are inventor s on patents related to MIBI technology (patent nos. 

US20150287578A1, WO2016153819A1 and US20180024111A1). E.M.G. declares no competing 

interests. 

Author contributions 

M.C.M. and E.M.G. conceived the project and provided tissue samples. M.C.M, M.A.L., and 

E.M.G. curated the tissue specimens and associated metadata. C.C.L., M.C.M., and E.M.G. 

designed the MIBI -TOF panel. C.C.L., M.C.M., A.S., and M.G. performed reagent op timization 

and generated the MIBI -TOF data. C.C.L. processed and analyzed the MIBI -TOF data. C.C.L., 

M.C.M., and E.M.G. wrote the manuscript. S.C.B., M.A. , and E.M.G. supervised the project. All 

authors provided feedback on the manuscript. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

1. Global HIV & AIDS statistics — 2025 fact sheet 

https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/fact -sheet. 

2. Deeks, S.G., Overbaugh, J., Phillips, A., and Buchbinder, S. (2015). HIV infection. Nat 

Rev Dis Primers 1, 15035. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2015.35. 

3. Moir, S., Chun, T. -W., and Fauci, A.S. (2011). Pathogenic mechanisms of HIV disease. 

Annu Rev Pathol 6, 223 –248. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -pathol -011110 -130254. 

4. Vanhamel, J., Bruggemans, A., and Debyser, Z. (2019). Establishment of latent HIV -1

reservoirs: what do we really know? J Virus Erad 5, 3 –9. 

5. Landovitz, R.J., Scott, H., and Deeks, S.G. (2023). Prevention, treatment and cure of 

HIV infection. Nature Reviews Microbiology 21 , 657 –670. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579 -023 -

00914 -1. 

6. Chen, J., Zhou, T., Zhang, Y., Luo, S., Chen, H., Chen, D., Li, C., and Li, W. (2022). The 

reservoir of latent HIV. Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology Volume 12 -2022 .

7. Deeks, S.G., Archin, N., Cannon, P., Collins, S., Jones, R.B., de Jong, M.A.W.P., 

Lambotte, O., Lamplough, R., Ndung’u, T., Sugarman, J., et al. (2021). Research priorities for 

an HIV cure: International AIDS Society Global Scientific Strategy 2021. Natur e Medicine 27 ,

2085 –2098. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591 -021 -01590 -5. 

8. Finzi, D., Hermankova, M., Pierson, T., Carruth, L.M., Buck, C., Chaisson, R.E., Quinn, 

T.C., Chadwick, K., Margolick, J., Brookmeyer, R., et al. (1997). Identification of a reservoir for 

HIV -1 in patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy. Science 278 , 1295 –1300. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.278.5341.1295. 

9. Eisele, E., and Siliciano, R.F. (2012). Redefining the viral reservoirs that prevent HIV -1

eradication. Immunity 37 , 377 –388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.010. 

10. Henderson, L.J., Reoma, L.B., Kovacs, J.A., and Nath, A. (2020). Advances toward 

Curing HIV -1 Infection in Tissue Reservoirs. J. Virol. 94 , e00375 -19. 

https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00375 -19. 

11. Deleage, C., Wietgrefe, S.W., Del Prete, G., Morcock, D.R., Hao, X.P., Piatak, M.J., 

Bess, J., Anderson, J.L., Perkey, K.E., Reilly, C., et al. (2016). Defining HIV and SIV Reservoirs 

in Lymphoid Tissues. Pathog Immun 1, 68 –106. https://doi.org/10.20411/pai.v1i1.100. 

12. Fletcher, C.V., Staskus, K., Wietgrefe, S.W., Rothenberger, M., Reilly, C., Chipman, J.G., 

Beilman, G.J., Khoruts, A., Thorkelson, A., Schmidt, T.E., et al. (2014). Persistent HIV -1

replication is associated with lower antiretroviral drug concentrations in lymphatic tissues. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , 2307 –2312. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1318249111. 

13. Wong, J.K., and Yukl, S.A. (2016). Tissue reservoirs of HIV. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 11 ,

362 –370. https://doi.org/10.1097/COH.0000000000000293. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14. Banga, R., Procopio, F.A., Noto, A., Pollakis, G., Cavassini, M., Ohmiti, K., Corpataux, 

J. -M., de Leval, L., Pantaleo, G., and Perreau, M. (2016). PD -1(+) and follicular helper T cells 

are responsible for persistent HIV -1 transcription in treated avirem ic individuals. Nat Med 22 ,

754 –761. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4113. 

15. Dimopoulos, Y., Moysi, E., and Petrovas, C. (2017). The Lymph Node in HIV 

Pathogenesis. Current HIV/AIDS Reports 14 , 133 –140. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11904 -017 -

0359 -7. 

16. Ndhlovu, Z.M., Kamya, P., Mewalal, N., Kløverpris, H.N., Nkosi, T., Pretorius, K., Laher, 

F., Ogunshola, F., Chopera, D., Shekhar, K., et al. (2015). Magnitude and Kinetics of CD8+ T 

Cell Activation during Hyperacute HIV Infection Impact Viral Set Point. Immunity 43 , 591 –604. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2015.08.012. 

17. Walker, B., and McMichael, A. (2012). The T -cell response to HIV. Cold Spring Harb 

Perspect Med 2. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a007054. 

18. Buggert, M., Nguyen, S., Salgado -Montes de Oca, G., Bengsch, B., Darko, S., Ransier, 

A., Roberts, E.R., Del Alcazar, D., Brody, I.B., Vella, L.A., et al. (2018). Identification and 

characterization of HIV -specific resident memory CD8(+) T cells in human lymphoid tissue. Sci 

Immunol 3. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aar4526. 

19. Calvet -Mirabent, M., Sánchez -Cerrillo, I., Martín -Cófreces, N., Martínez -Fleta, P., de la 

Fuente, H., Tsukalov, I., Delgado -Arévalo, C., Calzada, M.J., de los Santos, I., Sanz, J., et al. 

(2022). Antiretroviral therapy duration and immunometabolic state d etermine efficacy of ex vivo 

dendritic cell -based treatment restoring functional HIV -specific CD8+ T cells in people living with 

HIV. eBioMedicine 81 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104090. 

20. Wang, Q., and Shan, L. (2024). Role of the CARD8 inflammasome in HIV pathogenesis. 

Cell Insight 3, 100193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellin.2024.100193. 

21. Barouch, D.H., Ghneim, K., Bosche, W.J., Li, Y., Berkemeier, B., Hull, M., Bhattacharyya, 

S., Cameron, M., Liu, J., Smith, K., et al. (2016). Rapid Inflammasome Activation following 

Mucosal SIV Infection of Rhesus Monkeys. Cell 165 , 656 –667. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.03.021. 

22. Bandera, A., Masetti, M., Fabbiani, M., Biasin, M., Muscatello, A., Squillace, N., Clerici, 

M., Gori, A., and Trabattoni, D. (2018). The NLRP3 Inflammasome Is Upregulated in HIV -

Infected Antiretroviral Therapy -Treated Individuals with Defective Immune Rec overy. Front 

Immunol 9, 214. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.00214. 

23. Fukazawa, Y., Lum, R., Okoye, A.A., Park, H., Matsuda, K., Bae, J.Y., Hagen, S.I., 

Shoemaker, R., Deleage, C., Lucero, C., et al. (2015). B cell follicle sanctuary permits persistent 

productive simian immunodeficiency virus infection in elite controllers. Nat Med 21 , 132 –139. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3781. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24. Beck, S.E., Veenhuis, R.T., and Blankson, J.N. (2019). Does B Cell Follicle Exclusion of 

CD8+ T Cells Make Lymph Nodes Sanctuaries of HIV Replication? Front Immunol 10 , 2362. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.02362. 

25. Connick, E., Mattila, T., Folkvord, J.M., Schlichtemeier, R., Meditz, A.L., Ray, M.G., 

McCarter, M.D., Mawhinney, S., Hage, A., White, C., et al. (2007). CTL fail to accumulate at 

sites of HIV -1 replication in lymphoid tissue. J Immunol 178 , 6975 –6983. 

https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.178.11.6975. 

26. Fukazawa, Y., Park, H., Cameron, M.J., Lefebvre, F., Lum, R., Coombes, N., Mahyari, 

E., Hagen, S.I., Bae, J.Y., Reyes, M.D. 3rd, et al. (2012). Lymph node T cell responses predict 

the efficacy of live attenuated SIV vaccines. Nat Med 18 , 1673 –1681. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2934. 

27. Li, S., Folkvord, J.M., Kovacs, K.J., Wagstaff, R.K., Mwakalundwa, G., Rendahl, A.K., 

Rakasz, E.G., Connick, E., and Skinner, P.J. (2019). Low levels of SIV -specific CD8+ T cells in 

germinal centers characterizes acute SIV infection. PLoS Pathog 15 , e1007311 –e1007311. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1007311. 

28. Collins, D.R., Hitschfel, J., Urbach, J.M., Mylvaganam, G.H., Ly, N.L., Arshad, U., 

Racenet, Z.J., Yanez, A.G., Diefenbach, T.J., and Walker, B.D. (2023). Cytolytic CD8(+) T cells 

infiltrate germinal centers to limit ongoing HIV replication in spontaneous controller lymph 

nodes. Sci Immunol 8, eade5872. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.ade5872. 

29. Baiyegunhi, O.O., Mann, J., Khaba, T., Nkosi, T., Mbatha, A., Ogunshola, F., Chasara, 

C., Ismail, N., Ngubane, T., Jajbhay, I., et al. (2022). CD8 lymphocytes mitigate HIV -1

persistence in lymph node follicular helper T cells during hyperacute -treated inf ection. Nat 

Commun 13 , 4041. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -31692 -8. 

30. Ogunshola, F.J., Smidt, W., Naidoo, A.F., Nkosi, T., Ngubane, T., Khaba, T., Baiyegunhi, 

O.O., Mahlobo, B., Rasehlo, S., Ngema, N., et al. (2022). Hypermethylation at the CXCR5 gene 

locus limits trafficking potential of CD8+ T cells into B -cell follicles during HIV -1 infection. Blood 

Adv 6, 1904 –1916. https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2021006001. 

31. Strongin, Z., Raymond Marchand, L., Deleage, C., Pampena, M.B., Cardenas, M.A., 

Beusch, C.M., Hoang, T.N., Urban, E.A., Gourves, M., Nguyen, K., et al. (2024). Distinct SIV -

specific CD8+ T cells in the lymph node exhibit simultaneous effector and stem -like profiles and 

are associated with limited SIV persistence. Nature Immunology 25 , 1245 –1256. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590 -024 -01875 -0. 

32. Reuter, M.A., Del Rio Estrada, P.M., Buggert, M., Petrovas, C., Ferrando -Martinez, S., 

Nguyen, S., Sada Japp, A., Ablanedo -Terrazas, Y., Rivero -Arrieta, A., Kuri -Cervantes, L., et al. 

(2017). HIV -Specific CD8(+) T Cells Exhibit Reduced and Differentially Regulated Cytolytic 

Activity in Lymphoid Tissue. Cell Rep 21 , 3458 –3470. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.11.075. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33. Angelo, M., Bendall, S.C., Finck, R., Hale, M.B., Hitzman, C., Borowsky, A.D., Levenson, 

R.M., Lowe, J.B., Liu, S.D., Zhao, S., et al. (2014). Multiplexed ion beam imaging of human 

breast tumors. Nat Med 20 , 436 –442. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3488. 

34. Keren, L., Bosse, M., Thompson, S., Risom, T., Vijayaragavan, K., McCaffrey, E., 

Marquez, D., Angoshtari, R., Greenwald, N.F., Fienberg, H., et al. (2019). MIBI -TOF: A 

multiplexed imaging platform relates cellular phenotypes and tissue structure. Sci Adv 5,

eaax5851. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax5851. 

35. Nish, S.A., Zens, K.D., Kratchmarov, R., Lin, W. -H.W., Adams, W.C., Chen, Y. -H., Yen, 

B., Rothman, N.J., Bhandoola, A., Xue, H. -H., et al. (2017). CD4+ T cell effector commitment 

coupled to self -renewal by asymmetric cell divisions. J Exp Med 214 , 39 –47. 

https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161046. 

36. Kim, C., Jin, J., Weyand, C.M., and Goronzy, J.J. (2020). The Transcription Factor TCF1 

in T Cell Differentiation and Aging. Int J Mol Sci 21 . https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21186497. 

37. Ranek, J.S., Greenwald, N.F., Goldston, M., Camacho Fullaway, C., Sowers, C., Kong, 

A., Mouron, S., Quintela -Fandino, M., West, R.B., Bendall, S.C., et al. (2026). The automated 

computational workflow QUICHE reveals structural definitions of antitumor res ponses in triple -

negative breast cancer. Nature Cancer 7, 451 –468. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018 -026 -01122 -

5. 

38. Alter, G., Rihn, S., Walter, K., Nolting, A., Martin, M., Rosenberg, E.S., Miller, J.S., 

Carrington, M., and Altfeld, M. (2009). HLA class I subtype -dependent expansion of KIR3DS1+ 

and KIR3DL1+ NK cells during acute human immunodeficiency virus type 1 inf ection. J Virol 83 ,

6798 –6805. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00256 -09. 

39. Kazer, S.W., Aicher, T.P., Muema, D.M., Carroll, S.L., Ordovas -Montanes, J., Miao, V.N., 

Tu, A.A., Ziegler, C.G.K., Nyquist, S.K., Wong, E.B., et al. (2020). Integrated single -cell analysis 

of multicellular immune dynamics during hyperacute HIV -1 infectio n. Nature Medicine 26 , 511 –

518. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591 -020 -0799 -2. 

40. Suprewicz, Ł., Zakrzewska, M., Okła, S., Głuszek, K., Sadzyńska, A., Deptuła, P., 

Fiedoruk, K., and Bucki, R. (2024). Extracellular vimentin as a modulator of the 

immune response and an important player during infectious diseases. Immunology & Cell 

Biolog y 102 , 167 –178. https://doi.org/10.1111/imcb.12721. 

41. Peng, J. -M., Chiu, C. -F., Cheng, J. -H., Liu, H. -Y., Chang, Y. -L., Luo, J. -W., Weng, Y. -T., 

and Luo, H. -L. (2022). Evasion of NK cell immune surveillance via the vimentin -mediated 

cytoskeleton remodeling. Front Immunol 13 , 883178. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.883178. 

42. Tedla, N., Palladinetti, P., Kelly, M., Kumar, R.K., DiGirolamo, N., Chattophadhay, U., 

Cooke, B., Truskett, P., Dwyer, J., Wakefield, D., et al. (1996). Chemokines and T lymphocyte 

recruitment to lymph nodes in HIV infection. Am J Pathol 148 , 1367 –1373. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43. Tedla, N., Dwyer, J., Truskett, P., Taub, D., Wakefield, D., and Lloyd, A. (1999). 

Phenotypic and functional characterization of lymphocytes derived from normal and HIV -1-

infected human lymph nodes. Clin Exp Immunol 117 , 92 –99. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365 -

2249.1999.00942.x. 

44. Nguyen, S., Deleage, C., Darko, S., Ransier, A., Truong, D.P., Agarwal, D., Japp, A.S., 

Wu, V.H., Kuri -Cervantes, L., Abdel -Mohsen, M., et al. (2019). Elite control of HIV is associated 

with distinct functional and transcriptional signatures in lymphoid t issue CD8(+) T cells. Sci 

Transl Med 11 . https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4077. 

45. Yero, A., Farnos, O., Clain, J., Zghidi -Abouzid, O., Rabezanahary, H., Racine, G., 

Estaquier, J., and Jenabian, M. -A. (2022). Impact of Early ARV Initiation on Relative Proportions 

of Effector and Regulatory CD8 T Cell in Mesenteric Lymph Nodes and Periph eral Blood During 

Acute SIV Infection of Rhesus Macaques. J Virol 96 , e0025522. 

https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00255 -22. 

46. Buranapraditkun, S., Mitchell, J.L., Takata, H., Kroon, E., Pinyakorn, S., Tulmethakaan, 

N., Manasnayakorn, S., Chottanapund, S., Thantiworasit, P., Prueksakaew, P., et al. (2025). 

Dynamic changes in immune cell subsets in blood and lymph node over the co urse of acute HIV 

infection. J Virus Erad 11 , 100598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jve.2025.100598. 

47. Papadopoulos, A.O., Mvaya, L., Khaba, T., Ngema, N., Smidt, W., Msipa, S., Mahlobo, 

B., Ngubane, T., Dong, K., Jajbhay, I., et al. (2025). Spatial regulation of CD8(+) T cells at the 

HLA -E-NKG2A axis drives HIV persistence in lymph node B cell follicles. Cell Rep 44 , 116181. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116181. 

48. Banga, R., Rebecchini, C., Procopio, F.A., Noto, A., Munoz, O., Ioannidou, K., Fenwick, 

C., Ohmiti, K., Cavassini, M., Corpataux, J. -M., et al. (2019). Lymph node migratory dendritic 

cells modulate HIV -1 transcription through PD -1 engagement. PLoS Pathog 15 , e1007918. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1007918. 

49. Fardoos, R., Nyquist, S.K., Asowata, O.E., Kazer, S.W., Singh, A., Ngoepe, A., 

Giandhari, J., Mthabela, N., Ramjit, D., Singh, S., et al. (2022). HIV specific CD8(+) T(RM) -like 

cells in tonsils express exhaustive signatures in the absence of natural HIV c ontrol. Front 

Immunol 13 , 912038. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.912038. 

50. Pontillo, A., Silva, L.T., Oshiro, T.M., Finazzo, C., Crovella, S., and Duarte, A.J.S. (2012). 

HIV -1 induces NALP3 -inflammasome expression and interleukin -1β secretion in dendritic cells 

from healthy individuals but not from HIV -positive patients. AIDS 26 , 11 –18. 

https://doi.org/10.1097/QAD.0b013e32834d697f. 

51. Giron, L.B., Tanes, C.E., Schleimann, M.H., Engen, P.A., Mattei, L.M., Anzurez, A., 

Damra, M., Zhang, H., Bittinger, K., Bushman, F., et al. (2020). Sialylation and fucosylation 

modulate inflammasome -activating eIF2 Signaling and microbial translocation d uring HIV 

infection. Mucosal Immunol 13 , 753 –766. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41385 -020 -0279 -5. 

52. Nasi, M., Pecorini, S., De Biasi, S., Bianchini, E., Digaetano, M., Neroni, A., Lo Tartaro, 

D., Pullano, R., Pinti, M., Gibellini, L., et al. (2019). Altered Expression of PYCARD, Interleukin 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1β, Interleukin 18, and NAIP in Successfully Treated HIV -Positive Patients With a Low Ratio of 

CD4+ to CD8+ T Cells. J Infect Dis 219 , 1743 –1748. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy730. 

53. Caocci, M., Niu, M., Fox, H.S., and Burdo, T.H. (2024). HIV Infection Drives Foam Cell 

Formation via NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation. Int J Mol Sci 25 .

https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25042367. 

54. Lai, Y., Zhuang, L., Zhu, J., Wang, S., Guo, C., Chen, B., Li, J., Shi, J., Li, M., Yang, N., 

et al. (2024). Novel approach to alleviate lupus nephritis: targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome in 

CD8(+)CD69(+)CD103(+) T(RM) cells. J Transl Med 22 , 1139. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967 -

024 -05951 -9. 

55. Monroe, K.M., Yang, Z., Johnson, J.R., Geng, X., Doitsh, G., Krogan, N.J., and Greene, 

W.C. (2014). IFI16 DNA sensor is required for death of lymphoid CD4 T cells abortively infected 

with HIV. Science 343 , 428 –432. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1243640. 

56. Jalloh, S., Hughes, I.K., Akiyama, H., Gojanovich, A.D., Quiñones -Molina, A.A., Yang, 

M., Henderson, A.J., Mostoslavsky, G., and Gummuluru, S. (2025). Expression of intron -

containing HIV -1 RNA induces NLRP1 inflammasome activation in myeloid cells. PLoS B iol 23 ,

e3003320. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3003320. 

57. Tenner -Racz, K., and Racz, P. (1995). Follicular dendritic cells initiate and maintain 

infection of the germinal centers by human immunodeficiency virus. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 

201 , 141 –159. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -79603 -6_9. 

58. Heesters, B.A., Lindqvist, M., Vagefi, P.A., Scully, E.P., Schildberg, F.A., Altfeld, M., 

Walker, B.D., Kaufmann, D.E., and Carroll, M.C. (2015). Follicular Dendritic Cells Retain 

Infectious HIV in Cycling Endosomes. PLOS Pathogens 11 , e1005285. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005285. 

59. Spiegel, H., Herbst, H., Niedobitek, G., Foss, H.D., and Stein, H. (1992). Follicular 

dendritic cells are a major reservoir for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in lymphoid 

tissues facilitating infection of CD4+ T -helper cells. Am J Pathol 140 , 15 –22. 

60. Keele, B.F., Tazi, L., Gartner, S., Liu, Y., Burgon, T.B., Estes, J.D., Thacker, T.C., 

Crandall, K.A., McArthur, J.C., and Burton, G.F. (2008). Characterization of the follicular 

dendritic cell reservoir of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 82 , 5548 –5561. 

https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00124 -08. 

61. Greenbaum, S., Averbukh, I., Soon, E., Rizzuto, G., Baranski, A., Greenwald, N.F., 

Kagel, A., Bosse, M., Jaswa, E.G., Khair, Z., et al. (2023). A spatially resolved timeline of the 

human maternal –fetal interface. Nature 619 , 595 –605. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -023 -

06298 -9. 

62. McCaffrey, E.F., Donato, M., Keren, L., Chen, Z., Delmastro, A., Fitzpatrick, M.B., Gupta, 

S., Greenwald, N.F., Baranski, A., Graf, W., et al. (2022). The immunoregulatory landscape of 

human tuberculosis granulomas. Nature Immunology. https://doi.org/10.1 038/s41590 -021 -

01121 -x. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.11.724393 doi: bioRxiv preprint

63. Keren, L., Bosse, M., Marquez, D., Angoshtari, R., Jain, S., Varma, S., Yang, S. -R., 

Kurian, A., Van Valen, D., and West, R. (2018). A structured tumor -immune microenvironment in 

triple negative breast cancer revealed by multiplexed ion beam imaging. Cell 174 , 1373 -1387. 

e19. 

64. Risom, T., Glass, D.R., Averbukh, I., Liu, C.C., Baranski, A., Kagel, A., McCaffrey, E.F., 

Greenwald, N.F., Rivero -Gutiérrez, B., Strand, S.H., et al. (2022). Transition to invasive breast 

cancer is associated with progressive changes in the structure and composition of tumor 

stroma. Cell 185 , 299 -310.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.023. 

65. Liu, C.C., Bosse, M., Kong, A., Kagel, A., Kinders, R., Hewitt, S.M., Varma, S., van de 

Rijn, M., Nowak, S.H., Bendall, S.C., et al. (2022). Reproducible, high -dimensional imaging in 

archival human tissue by multiplexed ion beam imaging by time -of -flight (MIBI -TOF). Laboratory 

Investigation 102 , 762 –770. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41374 -022 -00778 -8. 

66. Greenwald, N.F., Miller, G., Moen, E., Kong, A., Kagel, A., Dougherty, T., Fullaway, C.C., 

McIntosh, B.J., Leow, K.X., Schwartz, M.S., et al. (2021). Whole -cell segmentation of tissue 

images with human -level performance using large -scale data annotation a nd deep learning. 

Nature Biotechnology. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587 -021 -01094 -0. 

67. Liu, C.C., Greenwald, N.F., Kong, A., McCaffrey, E.F., Leow, K.X., Mrdjen, D., Cannon, 

B.J., Rumberger, J.L., Varra, S.R., and Angelo, M. (2023). Robust phenotyping of highly 

multiplexed tissue imaging data using pixel -level clustering. Nature Communicati ons 14 , 4618. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -40068 -5. 

68. Schiemann, R., Gherardini, P.F., Kageyama, R., Travers, M., and Kitch, L. (2020). Mantis 

Viewer. Version v1.2.0 -beta.1 (Zenodo). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4909620 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4909620. 

69. Rumberger, J.L., Greenwald, N.F., Ranek, J.S., Boonrat, P., Walker, C., Franzen, J., 

Varra, S.R., Kong, A., Sowers, C., Liu, C.C., et al. (2025). Automated classification of cellular 

expression in multiplexed imaging data with Nimbus. Nature Methods 22 , 2161 –2170. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592 -025 -02826 -9. 

70. Liu, C.C., McCaffrey, E.F., Greenwald, N.F., Soon, E., Risom, T., Vijayaragavan, K., 

Oliveria, J. -P., Mrdjen, D., Bosse, M., Tebaykin, D., et al. (2022). Multiplexed Ion Beam Imaging: 

Insights into Pathobiology. Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 17 , 403 –423. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -pathmechdis -030321 -091459. 

71. Chen, Z., Soifer, I., Hilton, H., Keren, L., and Jojic, V. (2020). Modeling Multiplexed 

Images with Spatial -LDA Reveals Novel Tissue Microenvironments. J Comput Biol 27 , 1204 –

1218. https://doi.org/10.1089/cmb.2019.0340.