Title: ProtoMedAgent: Multimodal Clinical Interpretability via Privacy-Aware Agentic Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14113v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:16:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# ProtoMedAgent: Multimodal Clinical Interpretability via Privacy-Aware Agentic Workflows 

Alvaro Lopez Pellicer 1,†

, Plamen Angelov 1, Marwan Bukhari 2, Yi Li 1, Eduardo Soares 3, Jemma Kerns 21School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University 

> 2

Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University 3PUC-Rio, Puc-Behring Institute for AI 

Abstract 

While interpretable prototype networks offer compelling case-based reasoning for clinical diagnostics, their raw continuous outputs lack the semantic structure required for medical documentation. Bridging this gap via stan-dard Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) routinely trig-gers “retrieval sycophancy,” where Large Language Models (LLMs) hallucinate post-hoc rationalizations to align with visual predictions. We introduce ProtoMedAgent, a frame-work that formalizes multimodal clinical reporting as an iterative, zero-gradient test-time optimization problem over a strict neuro-symbolic bottleneck. Operating on a frozen prototype backbone, we distill latent visual and tabular fea-tures into a discrete semantic memory. Online generation is strictly constrained by exact set-theoretic differentials and a reflective Scribe-Critic loop, mathematically precluding unsupported narrative claims. To safely bound data dis-closure, we introduce a semantic privacy gate governed by 

k-anonymity and ℓ-diversity. Evaluated on a 4,160-patient clinical cohort, ProtoMedAgent achieves 91.2% Compar-ison Set Faithfulness where it fundamentally outperforms standard RAG (46.2%). ProtoMedAgent additionally lever-ages a binding ℓ-diversity phase transition to systematically reduce artifact-level membership inference risks by an abso-lute 9.8%. 

1. Introduction 

In clinical practice, high-stakes diagnostic assessment is inherently multimodal. For instance, in bone health screen-ing, DEXA imaging provides dense structural and spatial cues, while tabular patient variables (e.g., age, BMI, FRAX risk factors) contextualize the overarching disease sever-ity [ 2 , 31 ]. While modern deep networks readily optimize over these heterogeneous modalities to achieve high predic-tive accuracy, they leave a critical gap in clinician-facing 

> †Corresponding author. Email: a.lopezpellicer@lancaster.ac.uk

Figure 1. Overview of an Agentic Clinical Report Generation framework A multimodal patient case, comprising a lumbar DEXA scan and a patient record, is first processed by a frozen prototype backbone that retrieves raw visual exemplars and tabular statistics. Reconciling these outputs through unconstrained prototype seman-tics via a generic LLM yields an ungrounded, hallucination-prone clinical report. In contrast, by enforcing constrained prototype semantics, ProtoMedAgent utilizes a suite of dedicated agents (Vi-sion, Tabular, Memory, and Verification) to safely translate retrieved evidence into a fully grounded and verifiable clinical report. 

documentation: they fundamentally fail to generate trans-parent, auditable, and privacy-compliant rationales. This creates a mismatch between model performance and clin-ical usability, where accurate predictions lack trustworthy justification. This need is increasingly regulatory as well as technical: emerging EU rules reward clinical AI designs that are auditable, human-overseeable, robust, and compatible with controlled data access and interoperable data infrastruc-tures [10, 11]. Interpretable-by-design prototype networks have emerged 

> arXiv:2605.14113v1 [cs.CV] 13 May 2026

as a compelling alternative, offering case-based reasoning by exposing training exemplars with the logic of “this looks like that” [ 4 , 26 , 27 ]. Yet, the raw evidence surface of proto-type retrieval—comprising scalar similarity scores and con-tinuous feature maps—is semantically disconnected from clinical reporting workflows. The standard intervention of coupling a Large Language Model (LLM) via Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to interpret these latent proto-types routinely collapses. When tasked with reconciling un-constrained visual features and clinical priors, LLMs exhibit severe multimodal hallucination and retrieval sycophancy, fabricating similarities to post-rationalize the network’s pre-diction [34, 36]. Inspired by recent advances in reflective agentic systems, we introduce ProtoMedAgent (Figure 1), a framework that bridges the gap between continuous visual reasoning and discrete clinical documentation. We hypothesize that faith-ful multimodal reporting requires decoupling the diagnos-tic forward pass from the evidence documentation . Rather than treating reporting as an unconstrained generative pass, we cast it as an iterative LLM-in-the-loop test-time opti-mization problem operating over a strict neuro-symbolic bottleneck. Our framework acts upon a frozen prototype backbone, ProtoMedX [ 31 ]. Offline, we project the continuous pro-totype space into a privacy-gated semantic memory, distill-ing visual and tabular distributions into discrete assertions bounded by strict k-anonymity and ℓ-diversity. Online, we introduce a reflective refinement loop: exact set-theoretic dif-ferentials are computed between the query and the retrieved memory, establishing an absolute admissible state space. A Scribe-Critic loop then iteratively optimizes the generated report, utilizing the LLM as both a proposal distribution and a constraint evaluator until the artifact achieves perfect neuro-symbolic alignment. This work investigates the following research questions: • RQ1 (Neuro-Symbolic Grounding): How can latent mul-timodal prototype retrieval be converted into a discrete semantic bottleneck that promotes evidence-grounded gen-eration and reduces the space for unsupported LLM out-puts? • RQ2 (Test-Time Optimization): Can an iterative reflec-tive critic at test time improve reporting faithfulness with-out requiring gradient updates or altering the predictive behavior of the frozen vision backbone? 

Contributions. 

1. Agentic LLM-in-the-Loop Test-Time Optimization: 

We formalize clinical reporting as a zero-gradient test-time optimization process, leveraging an offline privacy-gated memory and an online reflective reasoning loop to safely decode a frozen prototype classifier. 2. Neuro-Symbolic Verification: We replace heuristic LLM comparisons with deterministic set-theoretic dif-ferentials. This is enforced via an iterative Scribe-Critic optimization loop that guarantees citation accuracy and typed-value consistency, fundamentally mitigating re-trieval sycophancy. 3. Provable Privacy-Utility Bounds: We introduce a novel semantic release gate utilizing k-anonymity and 

ℓ-diversity for continuous prototype memory, demonstrat-ing mathematically bounded disclosure risk and improved empirical faithfulness on a 4,160-patient clinical cohort. 

2. Related Work 

Interpretable-by-design prototype models natively explain their predictions by retrieving latent exemplars from the training distribution, operationalizing the intuitive logic of “this looks like that” [ 1, 4 , 26 , 27 ]. In high-stakes medi-cal domains, such inherently transparent architectures are strongly preferred over post-hoc explainers [ 35 ]. While re-cent approaches like ProtoMedX [ 31 ] advance this paradigm via input-dependent multimodal gating, the native evidence surface of these models—comprising scalar similarities and continuous feature activations—exhibits a profound seman-tic gap when mapped to discrete clinical reporting workflows. Recent works have explored the use of LLMs for clinical report generation and multimodal reasoning over medical images and structured data [ 25 ], including radiology report generation [ 6] and clinical decision support systems [ 40 ]. However, these approaches typically rely on end-to-end gen-erative pipelines without explicit or verifiable grounding to underlying evidence, limiting their reliability in high-stakes settings [3, 16, 40]. To bridge this representational gap, recent advancements have increasingly scaled test-time compute by configur-ing Large Language Models (LLMs) as compound, reflec-tive agents. Frameworks such as AlphaCodium [ 32 ] and TimeXL [ 17 ] demonstrate that interleaving generation with iterative self-critique [ 37 , 45 ] yields significant performance gains for complex, multi-step reasoning without requir-ing gradient updates. However, simply grounding these agentic loops via standard Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [ 20 ] introduces critical failure modes in clinical set-tings. Tasking an LLM to heuristically compare retrieved items reliably induces retrieval sycophancy and multimodal hallucination [ 24 , 34 , 36 ]. Because language models tend to prioritize internal semantic priors over contradicting external evidence, even cited RAG outputs frequently suffer from spurious post-rationalization [28, 42]. Modern constrained decoding engines, including Out-lines [ 43 ], XGrammar [ 7], and JSONFormer [ 33 ], attempt to reign in this behavior by enforcing strict syntactic schema adherence [ 12 , 39 ]. Yet, while these tools guarantee struc-tural validity, they cannot mathematically guarantee seman-tic faithfulness. Resolving this tension requires replacing un-constrained heuristic comparison with deterministic, neuro-symbolic bottlenecks that formally bound the generative hypothesis space. Beyond the challenge of hallucination and other vulner-abilities [ 30 ], translating retrieved training exemplars into natural language exposes compound systems to severe pri-vacy vulnerabilities. Surfacing raw exemplars during re-trieval creates direct vectors for membership and attribute inference attacks [ 15 , 38 ]. While Differential Privacy (DP) offers robust theoretical bounds via noise injection [ 13 , 29 ], it often catastrophically degrades the exact clinical fidelity required in dense medical imagery. Alternatively, classical 

k-anonymity [ 41 ] and its semantic extensions, such as ℓ-diversity [ 23 ] and t-closeness [ 22 ], formalize disclosure risk without injecting continuous noise. By conceptualizing these classical privacy mechanisms as a non-differentiable Markov bottleneck prior to LLM context aggregation, it becomes pos-sible to mathematically secure generated text artifacts against exact linkage and attribute inference, thereby satisfying strin-gent medical data regulations [ 8 , 9] without modifying the underlying training dynamics. Beyond privacy law, this de-sign is also well aligned with emerging EU digital regulation. The EU AI Act foregrounds risk management, technical doc-umentation, logging, deployer-facing transparency, human oversight, and lifecycle accuracy/robustness for high-risk AI systems, while the EU Data Act reinforces the value of controlled data access, portability, and interoperable data-processing infrastructures. Together, these trends further motivate privacy-aware, modular, and auditable semantic abstractions for clinical AI deployment [10, 11]. 

3. ProtoMedAgent 

ProtoMedAgent conceptualizes clinical reporting as an evidence-grounded translation problem under explicit test-time constraints, as illustrated in Figure 2. By preserv-ing a frozen predictive backbone and introducing a neuro-symbolic bottleneck, language generation is restricted to operate as an iterative, deterministic interpreter rather than an unconstrained confabulator. Concretely, we decouple prediction from reporting by constraining the generative pro-cess to operate over a verified, discrete semantic state derived from prototype evidence. 

3.1. Problem Setting 

Let a patient query be x = (I, t), comprising a high-dimensional visual input I and structured tabular features 

t. We utilize a frozen prototype network, ProtoMedX [ 31 ], which maps x to a predicted class ˆy, an auxiliary severity scalar ˆz(x), a modality attention gate α(x) ∈ [0 , 1] , and a retrieved prototype neighborhood: 

Nk(x) = {(j, w j , s j )}kj=1 

where j is the prototype index, wj the voting weight, and sj

the continuous retrieval similarity. Our goal is to generate a natural language report R that maximizes clinical fluency while strictly adhering to the evi-dence encoded in Nk(x). To achieve this without gradient updates to the generative model, we project x and Nk(x)

into a shared, discrete semantic space of structured clinical assertions, computing exact morphological and clinical dif-ferentials that define the admissible semantic state prior to LLM-in-the-loop generation. 

3.2. Offline Memory Distillation & Privacy 

Directly exposing raw training images ( Ij ) to an LLM in-vites sycophantic hallucinations and introduces unaccept-able privacy attack vectors. We distill training prototypes 

pj = ( Ij , tj , y j ) into a discrete memory bank of ProtoCards ,

Cj .

Perceptual and Tabular Abstraction. A radiology Vision-Language Model (VLM), gvlm , serves as a Perception Agent. To extract robust features, gvlm evaluates Ij under R com-plementary prompting views. We apply embedding-based clustering and contradiction filtering to extract a conserva-tive set of visual assertions Aj . Concurrently, a deterministic Tabular Agent projects continuous patient variables to quan-tized bins ˜Tj = Q(tj ). A schema-constrained generator 

gcard formats the tuple (Aj , ˜Tj ) into a structured ProtoCard 

Cj .

Semantic Privacy Gate. We operationalize a semantic privacy gate acting as a non-differentiable regularizer over the memory bank. We enforce a pragmatic k-anonymity and ℓ-diversity rule over a release signature σ(j), derived from quantized clinical fields and semantic buckets of the consensus assertions. The visible export surface is: 

Ψ( j) = 



Cj , if cnt( σ(j)) ≥ k

and ldiv( σ(j)) ≥ ℓ, 

[REDACTED] , otherwise. 

(1) Redacted prototypes contribute to the diagnostic forward pass but are completely obfuscated from the LLM’s test-time reasoning context. 

3.3. Online Reflective Test-Time Optimization 

During inference, the query x is similarly abstracted into a CaseCard containing visual assertions A(x) and quantized data ˜T (x).

Deterministic Differentials and Visual Deferral. To pre-vent the LLM from hallucinating correlations, a Supervi-sor agent evaluates the alignment between A(x) and the retrieved prototype signatures. If discordance exceeds a Figure 2. Detailed architecture of ProtoMedAgent. (a) Offline Memory Distillation & Privacy abstracts raw images and tabular records into a discrete semantic memory bank governed by a k-anonymity and ℓ-diversity privacy gate. (b) The intermediate Semantic Memory Bank securely stores verifiable ProtoCards. (c) Online Reflective Test-Time Optimization maps a new patient query into a CaseCard, computes exact set-theoretic differentials ( ∆j ), and applies a zero-gradient Scribe-Critic optimization loop to decode the frozen ProtoMedX backbone into a verifiable report. 

threshold τ , the framework triggers visual deferral , sup-pressing image-based similarities to avoid forcing the model to rationalize contradictions. For visible prototypes ¯Cj = Ψ( j), we bypass heuristic LLM-driven reasoning by computing an exact set-theoretic differential: 

∆j =  A(x) ∩ Aj , A (x) \ Aj , A j \ A(x), ∆tab 

> j



where ∆tab  

> j

represents the deterministic mismatch in clinical factors. 

Zero-Gradient LLM-in-the-Loop Search. We frame re-port generation as an iterative, zero-gradient search over the discrete state space of natural language reports R. The Critic agent gcritic parameterizes an energy function Ecritic : R → 

R≥0 defined by a multi-objective constraint: 

Ecritic (Rt) = λ1Lschema + λ2Lcite + λ3Ltype + λ4LNLI 

where the loss terms penalize JSON invalidity, citation hal-lucination against the grounded state E(x), typed-value in-consistency, and logical entailment failures. The Scribe agent gscribe acts as a conditional proposal distribution 

Pscribe (Rt+1 | E(x), ∇Ecritic (Rt)) , where the gradient 

∇Ecritic is instantiated as structured natural language reflec-tions. This process is formalized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 LLM-in-the-Loop Reflective Optimization 

Require: Grounded state E(x), max iterations T , energy threshold ϵ = 0  

> 1:

R0 ∼ Pscribe (· | E(x))  

> 2:

for t = 0 to T − 1 do  

> 3:

Evaluate energy et = Ecritic (Rt) 

> 4:

if et ≤ ϵ then  

> 5:

return Rt ▷ Convergence to faithful state  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

Generate reflective critique ct ← ∇ Ecritic (Rt) 

> 8:

Sample new report Rt+1 ∼ Pscribe (· | E(x), c t) 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return DEFER  ▷ Failed to satisfy neuro-symbolic constraints 

3.4. Theoretical Guarantees of the Framework 

By restructuring multimodal reporting as an energy-based optimization problem over a neuro-symbolic bottleneck, Pro-toMedAgent provides two distinct operational guarantees regarding generative faithfulness and privacy exposure. For-mal proofs for both theorems are provided in Supplementary Section B. 

Theorem 1 (Bounded Generative Faithfulness): Let R

be the hypothesis space of all possible natural language re-ports, and let the deterministic critic parameterize a barrier energy function Ecritic : R → { 0, ∞} indicating an admis-sible constraint set. If the optimization converges such that 

Ecritic (R∗) = 0 , the set of atomic semantic claims within the accepted report R∗ is strictly bounded by the determinis-tic differential ∆j , mathematically precluding ungrounded generative confabulation. 

This theorem establishes that while the underlying Vision-Language Model (VLM) dictates the absolute visual truth of the system, the generative LLM is restricted from hallu-cinating structural or tabular comparisons outside the pre-computed intersection (A(x)∩Aj ) and relative complements 

(A(x) \ Aj , A j \ A(x)) . The generative hypothesis space is thereby safely bounded to strict interpretation of the sym-bolic state rather than open-ended invention. 

Theorem 2 (Information-Theoretic Privacy Bound): 

Assuming the export function Ψ( j) enforces k-anonymity and strict ℓ-diversity, and an adversary A possesses a prior that matches the empirical distribution of the equivalence class (i.e., no auxiliary background knowledge), the maxi-mum posterior probability of A successfully executing an exact record linkage attack from the generated report R∗

is upper-bounded by 1/k , and the probability of targeted attribute inference is upper-bounded by 1/ℓ .

Because the semantic privacy gate acts as a non-differentiable Markov bottleneck prior to test-time aggrega-tion, the generative model operates exclusively on a sanitized context space. By the conditional independence established by the Markov property, the LLM cannot reconstruct case-specific signatures destroyed by Ψ( j), neutralizing artifact-level inversion attacks regardless of the LLM’s learned se-mantic priors. 

4. Experiments 

4.1. Task and dataset 

We study three-class bone-health classification (N ORMAL ,OSTEOPENIA , O STEOPOROSIS ) from lumbar-spine DEXA scans and structured clinical risk factors. We follow the dataset and protocol of ProtoMedX [ 31 ]: 4,160 de-identified NHS patients with 11 FRAX ®-aligned variables, using the published preprocessing pipeline and an 80/20 train–test split with an internal 10% validation split. 

4.2. Frozen encoder & memory 

All experiments use one frozen ProtoMedX checkpoint. For every case, the report writer receives the same backbone prediction ˆy, auxiliary T-score ˆz(x), modality gate α(x), and retrieved neighborhood Nk(x). The backbone is never fine-tuned inside the reporting experiments, so any differences in report quality arise from the evidence-to-language interface rather than from re-training the predictor. 

4.3. Backbone Agent choices and baselines 

For the Perception Agent, we use openly available medical VLMs (RadFM [ 44 ] and LLaVA-Med [ 21 ]) to extract atomic image assertions under multiple prompts, followed by the consensus step described in Sec. 3.2. For ProtoCard writing and report generation, we use medical instruction models such as BioMistral [ 19 ] and Meditron [ 5] under structured decoding [7, 43]. We compare against two reporting baselines that operate on the same frozen ProtoMedX outputs. Standard RAG 

conditions an LLM on the retrieved evidence and directly generates a report. LLM (LoRA) uses a domain-adapted schema-filling model [ 14 ], but still relies on the model to infer case–prototype agreement implicitly. ProtoMedAgent 

adds privacy-gated ProtoCards, deterministic comparison objects, supervisor-controlled visual deferral, and a final Scribe–Critic verification loop. 

4.4. Evaluation protocol 

ProtoMedAgent is accuracy-neutral, so we evaluate the re-porting layer rather than predictive accuracy. Our primary metric is Comparison Set Faithfulness (CSF): for each query–prototype pair, we derive deterministic reference sets of shared and differing evidence items from the comparison object ∆j , extract the items verbalized in the final report, and compute CSF precision, recall, F1, and weighted ac-curacy. These metrics test whether a report preserves the case–prototype comparison actually available to the system. We also evaluate the privacy–utility behavior of the re-leased evidence surface. First, we sweep the release gate over different (k, ℓ ) values and report similarity-weighted ev-idence utility, visible-card rate, redaction rate, and top-1 link-age success rate ( Link. ) on the ProtoCard surface. Second, at the selected operating point, we evaluate three artifact-level 

disclosure attacks on the released outputs: Membership-Inference Accuracy ( MIA ), which tests whether an attacker can determine whether the underlying case belongs to the protected source corpus [ 38 ]; Attribute-Inference Accuracy (AIA ), which tests whether sensitive source attributes can be inferred from the released artifact, potentially with auxiliary information [ 15 ]; and top-1 Linkage success rate ( Link. ), which tests whether sparse released cues suffice to re-identify the correct source record [ 18 ]. These attacks are directly relevant because ProtoMedAgent’s privacy gate and non-differentiable Markov bottleneck are designed to suppress residual membership leakage, sensitive-attribute disclosure, and exact re-identification risk. Formal definitions for each of our evaluation metrics are provided in Supplementary material section A. 5. Results 

Because ProtoMedAgent operates strictly as a test-time re-porting layer over a frozen ProtoMedX backbone, it is de-signed to be accuracy-neutral with respect to the underlying predictive task. Our evaluation therefore isolates the efficacy of the agentic translation layer. Specifically, we investigate whether formulating report generation as an iterative op-timization over a discrete neuro-symbolic bottleneck can enforce strict comparison faithfulness and bound privacy exposure, without sacrificing clinical fluency. Accordingly, all reported improvements reflect gains in reporting fidelity, safety, and privacy rather than predictive performance. 

5.1. Safety and Comparison Faithfulness 

To evaluate the fidelity of the generated reports against the retrieved visual evidence (answering RQ2), we introduce the Comparison Set Faithfulness (CSF) metric. CSF iso-lates the explicit matches and differences asserted in the generated text and evaluates them against the deterministic, set-theoretic differentials ( ∆j ) computed between the query and the retrieved ProtoCards, providing a direct measure of evidence-grounded comparison fidelity. As reported in Table 1, ProtoMedAgent achieves state-of-the-art performance for grounded clinical reporting. By decoupling the diagnostic forward pass from evidence docu-mentation, our framework restricts the Scribe agent to nar-rating only those evidence-supported partitions backed by exact citations. Furthermore, the iterative Critic-repair loop promotes item-level consistency: any hallucinated correla-tion that cannot be traced to the admissible semantic state is dynamically corrected or removed. This behavior is consis-tent with Theorem 1, which bounds the generative space to evidence-supported differentials. This mechanism directly addresses the vulnerability of standard generative approaches. Baselines such as Standard RAG [ 20 ] and domain-adapted LoRA [ 14 ] rely on implicit, unconstrained reasoning over retrieved contexts. Without explicit neuro-symbolic constraints, these models are prone to retrieval sycophancy, inventing post-hoc rationalizations to align with the backbone’s prediction. This failure mode is empirically confirmed by their degradation in CSF-Precision (46.2% and 63.1%, respectively) compared to the bounded output of ProtoMedAgent (91.2%). 

5.2. Privacy-Utility Dynamics & Disclosure Risk 

We evaluate the semantic privacy gate (answering RQ1) through a dual-lens approach: (i) a release-surface analy-sis mapping the (k, ℓ ) configuration space to characterize the privacy-utility frontier, and (ii) rigorous artifact-level attack probes measuring residual disclosure risk on the final generated text. A key empirical finding illustrated in Fig. 3(a) is the phase transition governed by ℓ-diversity. Under ℓ = 1 , scal-

Table 1. Safety and Faithfulness Study on the test cohort. By strictly bounding the generative hypothesis space to pre-computed deterministic differentials, ProtoMedAgent fundamentally miti-gates multimodal hallucination and unsupported claims. 

Method CSF-P ↑ CSF-R ↑ CSF-F1 ↑ CSF-WA ↑

Standard RAG 46.2 41.5 43.7 58.6 LLM (LoRA) 63.1 58.9 60.9 70.2 

Ours 91.2 78.0 84.1 92.7 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4      

> Top-1 linkage on released ProtoCards
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Evidence utility
> k=3
> k=9
> (k,) = (5, 2)
> =3 : zero release
> =2 decisive
> (a) Release-surface frontier
> =1
> =2 (all k)
> =3
> Evidence
> utility
> Visible-card
> rate
> Redaction
> rate
> Linkage
> exposure
> 0.673
> 0.593
> 0.407
> 0.167
> (b) Operating point (k,)=(5, 2)

Figure 3. Privacy-utility frontier of the exportable prototype ev-idence surface. Sweeping semantic k-anonymity ( k ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 9})and ℓ-diversity ( ℓ ∈ { 1, 2, 3}). (a) Under ℓ = 1 (orange), increasing 

k provides a smooth trade-off between utility and exposure. Im-posing ℓ = 2 (green) triggers a phase transition, collapsing all k

values to a single bounded regime, indicating diversity binds be-fore k-anonymity. (b) The selected operating point (k, ℓ ) = (5 , 2) 

retains robust evidence utility (0.673) while suppressing linkage exposure to 0.167. 

ing k-anonymity yields a smooth, proportional decay in both evidence utility and linkage exposure. However, enforcing 

ℓ = 2 causes all tested k values to collapse into an iden-tical, highly constrained operating regime (utility = 0.673, linkage = 0.167). This indicates that the diversity of the un-derlying clinical attributes becomes the dominant constraint prior to cohort size ( k-anonymity), effectively saturating the admissible equivalence classes. This behavior reveals an important structural property of the semantic release surface: privacy constraints do not com-bine linearly. Instead, ℓ-diversity introduces a combinatorial constraint over attribute distributions, which sharply reduces the feasible support of the exportable memory. As a result, once diversity is enforced, increasing k yields diminishing returns, explaining the observed collapse across all k values. Pushing the constraint further to ℓ = 3 uniformly eliminates valid equivalence classes, reducing the visible surface to zero. At the selected operating point of (k, ℓ ) = (5 , 2) , the gate retains 32 of 54 candidate ProtoCards (59.3% visibility) and Near-threshold normal study with heterogeneous lumbar preservation 

Query: 89F; lumbar DXA + tabular record. ProtoMedX output: NORMAL , T = −0.2, Confidence 89.4%; p1= normal proto 1 [N], p2/p3 = N/N. 

ProtoMedAgent report: Lumbar bone density remains within normal limits. Preservation is not uniform across the lumbar column: the lower lumbar vertebrae appear denser than the upper lumbar vertebrae, while the upper lumbar spine sits much closer to the normal/osteopenia boundary. Mild lower-lumbar degenerative change may be contributing to that apparent distal preservation, and incomplete coverage with indistinct vertebral labels limits exact vertebral assignment. Alcohol use is the only notable modifiable risk factor. Compared with preserved-density normal references, the study remains closer to a heterogeneous normal pattern than to the smoother early-loss osteopenic prototypes, so the final impression stays cautiously normal rather than low bone mass. 

ProtoCard N1   

> Prototype: normal proto 1 [N]. Typical pattern: the lower lumbar spine remains distinctly denser than the upper lumbar vertebrae and the whole column reads comfortably normal across a broad preserved range. Prior fragility fracture can coexist with this prototype, but unlike the boundary normal or osteopenic references the preserved structure remains convincing even when mild sclerosis or overlay exaggerates the distal vertebrae.

Boundary osteopenia distinguished from preserved density 

Query: 88F; lumbar DXA + tabular record. ProtoMedX output: OSTEOPENIA , T = −0.8, Confidence 69.6%; p1= osteopenia proto 0 [Op], p2/p3 = Op/N. 

ProtoMedAgent report: Low bone mass consistent with osteopenia is favored despite a threshold-adjacent estimate. The scan retains a lower-lumbar-greater-than-upper gradient, but preservation is discontinuous rather than smooth: the upper lumbar spine shows attenuation, and the column as a whole no longer reads as uniformly preserved. Probable lower-lumbar degenerative change, focal radiopaque overlay, and incomplete coverage all argue against overcalling the apparently denser lower vertebrae. Previous fragility fracture makes this boundary presentation clinically significant. Compared with the stronger preserved-density normal references, the study falls short of a truly cohesive normal pattern and is better explained by an early-loss osteopenic prototype. 

ProtoCard Op0   

> Prototype: osteopenia proto 0 [Op]. Typical pattern: lower lumbar reserve remains visible, but preser-vation is uneven across the column and the upper lumbar spine shows reduced density relative to the lower vertebrae. Rotation, limited coverage, overlay, and degenerative change are common, which is why this prototype anchors careful early-loss osteopenic wording.

Established osteoporosis with diffuse lumbar demineralization 

Query: 78F; lumbar DXA + tabular record. ProtoMedX output: OSTEOPOROSIS , T = −3.7, Confidence 96.4%; p1= osteoporosis proto 2 [Os], p2/p3 = Os/Op. 

ProtoMedAgent report: Bone density is in the osteoporotic range with established skeletal fragility. The lumbar column is diffusely demineralized, and the limited lower-lumbar density reserve is more plausibly explained by degenerative accentuation, focal overlay, and incomplete coverage than by genuinely preserved bone. Previous fragility fracture reinforces a high fracture-risk state. Compared with the threshold-sensitive osteopenic references, the study aligns with a cohesive low-density osteoporotic prototype, supporting a decisive osteoporosis interpretation. 

ProtoCard Os2    

> Prototype: osteoporosis proto 2 [Os]. Typical study: deeper low density that sits farther from the os-teopenic boundary than the moderate severe references. The defining feature is depth of mineral loss rather than a dense ac-companying risk profile, so the image itself carries most of the diagnostic weight.

Figure 4. Final ProtoMedAgent qualitative outputs. Each row pairs a final ProtoMedAgent report at left with the displayed same-class ProtoCard reference at right. The header line shows the query summary and compact ProtoMedX output; p1 is the ProtoCard shown beside the report, while p2/p 3 summarize the remaining retrieved neighborhood. Here N = N ORMAL , Op = O STEOPENIA , and Os = OSTEOPOROSIS . The three examples show a cautious near-threshold normal interpretation, a boundary osteopenic case clarified by an early-loss osteopenic reference, and a decisively osteoporotic study anchored by deep low-density prototype evidence. Supplementary Sec. S4 expands the report gallery to routine, restricted-evidence, and harder boundary cases, and Supplementary Sec. S5 provides the full prototype atlas. Table 2. Artifact-level disclosure risk on exported evidence. Met-rics include Membership-Inference Accuracy (MIA), Attribute-Inference Accuracy (AIA), and top-1 Linkage success rate (Link.). ProtoMedAgent systematically lowers empirical attack vulnerabili-ties by sanitizing the generative context window. 

Method MIA ↓ AIA ↓ Link. ↓

Standard RAG 51.2 34.2 39.3 LLM (LoRA) 49.7 33.0 38.1 

Ours 41.4 25.8 34.5 

deliberately enforces a 40.7% redaction rate. Importantly, this redaction is not random but structured: removed proto-types correspond to semantically rare or uniquely identifying clinical configurations. This confirms our theoretical claim that privacy-aware prototype reporting should be formulated as an explicit operating-point optimization over a semantic release surface, rather than treating raw exemplar exposure as a binary heuristic. Table 2 measures the residual disclosure risk remain-ing in the final text artifacts. Because ProtoMedAgent enforces generation through a non-differentiable Markov bottleneck, the LLM is effectively prevented from recon-structing case-specific signatures. This constraint reduces the effective attack surface by restricting generation to ag-gregated, equivalence-class-level information rather than instance-level features. This theoretical protection translates into robust empirical defense, yielding the lowest risk profiles across all metrics, notably reducing MIA by an absolute 9.8% and AIA by 8.4% relative to Standard RAG. Importantly, these reduc-tions are achieved without modifying the underlying gen-erative model, indicating that controlling the information interface—rather than the model parameters—is sufficient to significantly mitigate disclosure risk. 

5.3. Qualitative Results 

While quantitative metrics confirm strict neuro-symbolic adherence, Figure 4 demonstrates that this bottleneck does not materially degrade clinical fluency. The examples illus-trate how the LLM maps discrete ProtoCard references into cohesive, highly contextual natural language. Crucially, the qualitative variations across these reports are clinically substantive rather than stochastic artifacts of the language model. For instance, in the threshold-adjacent osteopenic study, the narrative does not simply echo a generic class label. Instead, it grounds its early mineral loss interpretation by explicitly contrasting the scan against stronger preserved-density normal prototypes, carefully ac-knowledging the residual lower-lumbar reserve. Conversely, the osteoporotic report synthesizes diffuse demineralization, historical fragility fractures, and alignment with a severe low-density reference prototype to anchor a coherent structural degradation narrative. Beyond descriptive fidelity, these examples highlight three important behavioral properties of ProtoMedAgent. First, the generated reports exhibit evidence-calibrated rea-soning : claims are modulated by the strength and consistency of retrieved prototypes, with boundary cases producing more nuanced, comparative language rather than overconfident categorical statements. Second, the framework demonstrates 

counterfactual sensitivity : small shifts in the retrieved pro-totype neighborhood lead to controlled and interpretable changes in the generated narrative, indicating that the LLM is responding to structured evidence rather than latent priors. Third, the system enforces faithful abstraction : while the wording remains fluent and expressive, all semantic content can be traced back to admissible set-theoretic differentials, preventing unsupported clinical assertions. Importantly, we also observe that when evidence is par-tially redacted by the privacy gate, the model adapts by pro-ducing more conservative and less specific language, rather than hallucinating missing details. This behavior suggests that the neuro-symbolic bottleneck induces a form of implicit uncertainty awareness in the generative process. By displaying the cited ProtoCards alongside the gener-ated text, ProtoMedAgent renders the LLM’s wording fully auditable in concrete visual and tabular terms. Notably, all narrative variations remain grounded in the admissible se-mantic state, demonstrating that expressivity is preserved without sacrificing faithfulness. Supplementary section C ex-pands this qualitative analysis to include complex boundary cases and restricted-evidence scenarios, while the complete prototype atlas is provided in Supplementary material sec-tion D. 

6. Discussion and Conclusion 

ProtoMedAgent formalizes multimodal prototype retrieval 

as a constrained, test-time optimization problem, effectively bridging the semantic gap between continuous representa-tions and discrete clinical documentation. By executing a strict Scribe ↔Critic loop over a privacy-gated semantic memory and a frozen ProtoMedX backbone, we reposition the LLM as a verifiable interpretability layer. This approach achieves state-of-the-art Comparison Set Faithfulness 

(91.2% CSF-Precision), proving that generative faithfulness can be structurally enforced without costly model parameter modifications. Furthermore, framing privacy-aware report-ing as an explicit operating-point optimization reveals a binding ℓ-diversity phase transition. This non-differentiable Markov bottleneck severely restricts case-specific informa-tion flow, delivering robust empirical defense. Including a 

9.8% absolute reduction in Membership Inference at-tacks without altering the underlying weights. Despite these systemic guarantees, the framework re-mains bounded by its upstream Perception Agent, which is vulnerable to correlated visual blind spots. Additionally, our heuristic Discordance Sentinel introduces an inherent ten-sion between generative expressivity and conservative visual deferral. From a privacy perspective, semantic k-anonymity and ℓ-diversity lack the worst-case theoretical guarantees of Differential Privacy, leaving residual exposure to adversaries with out-of-schema auxiliary knowledge. Crucially, while our neuro-symbolic bottleneck mathematically precludes hallucinated structural claims, it strictly bounds the space of admissible explanations without guaranteeing the absolute 

truthfulness of the underlying backbone’s perception. Nevertheless, as a non-diagnostic, assistive auditing tool that supports explicit human deferral and continuous “patch-ability” of prototype memories, ProtoMedAgent aligns di-rectly with the stringent technical transparency and human oversight mandates of the EU AI Act and EU Data Act .To fully research this clinical utility, a critical next step is conducting controlled user studies to rigorously val-idate our qualitative findings and assess the framework’s true impact on decision-making workflows. Methodologi-cally, future research should prioritize integrating calibrated uncertainty into the perception layer, formalizing citation semantics via schema-versioned references (e.g., JSONPath), and exploring hybrid DP-symbolic architectures to extend formal privacy bounds to continuous prototype systems. 

Acknowledgment 

This study is approved by the North West- Preston Research Ethics Committee (REC ref 21/NW/0309). This work is sup-ported by ELSA – European Lighthouse on Secure and Safe AI funded by the European Union under grant agreement No. 101070617. 

References           

> [1] Plamen Angelov and Eduardo Soares. Towards explainable deep neural networks (xdnn). Neural Networks , 130:185–194, 2020. 2 [2] OFM Riaz Rahman Aranya and Kevin Desai. Trace: Tem-poral radiology with anatomical change explanation for grounded x-ray report generation, 2026. 1 [3] Yaara Artsi, Eyal Klang, Jeremy D Collins, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Girish N Nadkarni, Panagiotis Korfiatis, and Vera Sorin. Large language models in radiology reporting-a sys-tematic review of performance, limitations, and clinical im-plications. Intelligence-Based Medicine , page 100287, 2025. 2[4] Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Chaofan Tao, Alina Jade Barnett, Jonathan Su, and Cynthia Rudin. This looks like that: Deep learning for interpretable image recognition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019. 2 [5] Zeming Chen, Alejandro Hern ´andez Cano, Angelika Ro-manou, Antoine Bonnet, Kyle Matoba, Francesco Salvi, Matteo Pagliardini, Simin Fan, Andreas K ¨opf, Amirkeivan Mohtashami, Alexandre Sallinen, Alireza Sakhaeirad, Vini-

tra Swamy, Igor Krawczuk, Deniz Bayazit, Axel Marmet, Syrielle Montariol, Mary-Anne Hartley, Martin Jaggi, and Antoine Bosselut. Meditron-70b: Scaling medical pretraining for large language models, 2023. 5 [6] Nicolas Deperrois, Hidetoshi Matsuo, Samuel Ruip ´erez-Campillo, Moritz Vandenhirtz, Sonia Laguna, Alain Ryser, Koji Fujimoto, Mizuho Nishio, Thomas M Sutter, Ju-lia E Vogt, et al. Radvlm: a multitask conversational vision-language model for radiology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03333 , 2025. 2 [7] Yixin Dong, Charlie F. Ruan, Yaxing Cai, Ruihang Lai, Ziyi Xu, Yilong Zhao, and Tianqi Chen. Xgrammar: Flexible and efficient structured generation engine for large language models. arXiv:2411.15100, 2024. 2, 5 [8] Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. 45 cfr §164.514: Other requirements relating to uses and disclosures of pro-tected health information (de-identification), 2025. Accessed: 2026-02-18. 3 [9] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2016/679 (general data protection regulation), 2016. 3 [10] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2023/2854 of the european parliament and of the council of 13 december 2023 on harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data (data act). Official Journal of the European Union, OJ L 2023/2854, 22 December 2023, 2023. Accessed: 2026-03-22. 1, 3 [11] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2024/1689 of the european parliament and of the council of 13 june 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act). Official Journal of the European Union, OJ L 2024/1689, 12 July 2024, 2024. Accessed: 2026-03-22. 1, 3 [12] Saibo Geng, Hudson Cooper, Michał Moskal, Samuel Jenkins, Julian Berman, Nathan Ranchin, Robert West, Eric Horvitz, and Harsha Nori. Generating structured outputs from lan-guage models: Benchmark and studies. arXiv:2501.10868, 2025. 2 [13] M. Emre Gursoy, Asim Inan, M. Emin Nergiz, and Yucel Saygin. Differentially private nearest neighbor classification. 

Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 31(5):1544–1575, 2017. 3 [14] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 5, 6 [15] Bargav Jayaraman and David Evans. Are attribute inference attacks just imputation? In Proceedings of The ACM Con-ference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) ,2022. 3, 5 [16] Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM computing surveys , 55(12):1–38, 2023. 2 [17] Yushan Jiang, Wenchao Yu, Geon Lee, Dongjin Song, Kijung Shin, Wei Cheng, Yanchi Liu, and Haifeng Chen. Timexl: Explainable multi-modal time series prediction with llm-in-the-loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01013 , 2025. 2 [18] Myeongseob Ko, Jihyun Jeong, Sumiran Singh Thakur, Gyuhak Kim, and Ruoxi Jia. From weak cues to real iden-tities: Evaluating inference-driven de-anonymization in llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18382 , 2026. 5 [19] Yanis Labrak, Adrien Bazoge, Emmanuel Morin, Pierre-Antoine Gourraud, Mickael Rouvier, and Richard Dufour. Biomistral: A collection of open-source pretrained large lan-guage models for medical domains, 2024. 5 [20] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K ¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. 2, 6 [21] Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Naumann, Hoifung Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00890 , 2023. 5 [22] Ninghui Li, Tiancheng Li, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. t-closeness: Privacy beyond k-anonymity and l-diversity. In 

Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) , pages 106–115, 2007. 3 [23] Ashwin Machanavajjhala, Johannes Gehrke, Daniel Kifer, and Muthuramakrishnan Venkitasubramaniam. l-diversity: Privacy beyond k-anonymity. ACM Transactions on Knowl-edge Discovery from Data , 1(1):3:1–3:52, 2007. 3 [24] Lars Malmqvist. Sycophancy in large language models: Causes and mitigations, 2024. 2 [25] Yoojin Nam, Dong Yeong Kim, Sunggu Kyung, Jinyoung Seo, Jeong Min Song, Jimin Kwon, Jihyun Kim, Wooyoung Jo, Hyungbin Park, Jimin Sung, et al. Multimodal large language models in medical imaging: current state and future directions. Korean Journal of Radiology , 26(10):900, 2025. 2 [26] Meike Nauta, Ron van Bree, and Christin Seifert. Neural pro-totype trees for interpretable fine-grained image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021. 2 [27] Meike Nauta, Ron van Bree, and Christin Seifert. Pip-net: Patch-based intuitive prototypes for interpretable image clas-sification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. 2 [28] Cheng Niu, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Siliang Xu, Kashun Shum, Randy Zhong, Juntong Song, and Tong Zhang. Ragtruth: A hallucination corpus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10862–10878, 2024. 2 [29] Nicolas Papernot, Shuang Song, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghu-nathan, Kunal Talwar, and ´Ulfar Erlingsson. Scalable private learning with pate, 2018. 3 [30] Alvaro Lopez Pellicer, Plamen Angelov, and Neeraj Suri. Se-curing (vision-based) autonomous systems: taxonomy, chal-lenges, and defense mechanisms against adversarial threats. 

Artificial Intelligence Review , 58(12):373, 2025. 3 [31] Alvaro Lopez Pellicer, Andre Mariucci, Plamen Angelov, Marwan Bukhari, and Jemma G. Kerns. Protomedx: Towards explainable multi-modal prototype learning for bone health classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops , pages 7357–7366, 2025. 1, 2, 3, 5 [32] Tal Ridnik, Dedy Kredo, and Itamar Friedman. Code gener-ation with alphacodium: From prompt engineering to flow engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08500 , 2024. 2 [33] Isaac Rogers. Jsonformer: Generate structured json from language models. GitHub repository, 2023. 2 [34] Aswin Rrv, Nemika Tyagi, Md Nayem Uddin, Neeraj Varsh-ney, and Chitta Baral. Chaos with keywords: Exposing large language models sycophancy to misleading keywords and evaluating defense strategies. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12717– 12733. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. 2 [35] Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence , 1:206–215, 2019. 2 [36] Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Du-venaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bowman, Newton Cheng, Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R. John-ston, Shauna Kravec, Timothy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan, Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models. arXiv:2310.13548, 2023. 2 [37] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366 , 2023. 2 [38] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 3–18. IEEE, 2017. 3, 5 [39] Connor Shorten, Charles Pierse, Thomas Benjamin Smith, Erika Cardenas, Akanksha Sharma, John Trengrove, and Bob van Luijt. Structuredrag: Json response formatting with large language models. arXiv:2408.11061, 2024. 2 [40] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature , 620(7972):172– 180, 2023. 2 [41] Latanya Sweeney. k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy. International Journal on Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-based Systems , 10(5):557–570, 2002. 3 [42] Jonas Wallat, Maria Heuss, Maarten de Rijke, and Avishek Anand. Correctness is not faithfulness in retrieval augmented generation attributions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Interna-tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Innovative Concepts and Theories in Information Retrieval (ICTIR ’25) , 2025. 2 [43] Brandon T. Willard and R´ emi Louf. Efficient guided genera-tion for large language models. arXiv:2307.09702, 2023. 2, 5[44] Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Towards generalist foundation model for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02463 , 2023. 5 [45] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 , 2022. 2