Title: A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06226v2

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:55:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 

Tianyu Liu 1,2,3 , Wangjie Zheng 2, Rui Yang 4, Benny Kai Guo Loo 5,6,17 , Hui Zhang 6,17 , Jeffries Lauran 6,17 , Jianlei Gu 2, Botao Yu 7, Weihao Xuan 8,9 , Kexin Huang 10 , Nan Liu 4,11,12 , James Zou 13 ,Yonghui Jiang 14,15 , Hua Xu 1,15,16,* and Hongyu Zhao 1,2,14,15,16,* 1Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, 

> 2

Department of Biostatistics, Yale University, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 4Center for Biomedical Data Science, Duke-NUS Medical School, 5Sport and Exercise Medicine Service, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, 6Training Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, 7Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, 8Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 9Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, 10 Phylo, 

> 11

NUS Artificial Intelligence Institute, National University of Singapore, 12 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, 13 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, 

> 14

Department of Genetics, Yale University, 15 Wu Tsai Institute, Yale University, 16 Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale University, 17 These authors contributed equally to this work as human experts., *Corresponding authors. 

Accurate and timely diagnosis is essential for effective treatment, particularly in the context of rare diseases. However, current diagnostic workflows often lead to prolonged assessment times and low accuracy. To address these limitations, we introduce Hygieia, a multi-modal AI agent system designed to support precision disease diagnosis by integrating diverse data sources, including phenotypic fea-tures, genetic profiles, and clinical records. Hygieia features a router-based and knowledge-enhanced framework that mitigates hallucination and tailors diagnostic strategies to different disease categories. Notably, it prioritizes risk-related genomic factors for rare diseases and provides confidence scores to assist clinical decision-making. We conducted a comprehensive evaluation demonstrating that Hygieia achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple diagnostic benchmarks. In collaboration with clinical experts from Yale School of Medicine and Duke-NUS Medical School, we further validated its practical utility by showing (1) Hygieia’s superior diagnostic performance compared to physicians with an improvement from 12%-60% and (2) its effectiveness in assisting clinicians with medical records for handling real-world cases. Our findings indicate that Hygieia not only enhances diagnostic accu-racy and interpretability but also significantly reduces clinician workload, highlighting its potential as a valuable tool in clinical decision support systems. 

Keywords: AI Agent, Disease Diagnosis, Rare Disease, Risk Gene Prioritization, Clinical System 

1. Introduction 

Rare diseases are defined as conditions affecting fewer than 1 in 2,000 individuals, affecting over 300 million patients worldwide (1–5). Moreover, the diagnosis and test recommendations for rare diseases are very challenging. Diagnosing rare diseases based on conventional medical methods typically takes 4 to 5 years (6), which is known as “diagnostic odyssey”. One reason is that the phenotypes of rare diseases can sometimes be difficult to distinguish directly from common diseases. This also increases the likelihood of misdiagnosis and mistreatment by physicians (7). To overcome the challenges mentioned above, researchers have begun collecting genotypes, pheno-

> Contact: tianyu.liu@yale.edu
> arXiv:2605.06226v2 [cs.AI] 9 May 2026 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

types, and diagnosis plans for rare diseases to enrich our understanding of these diseases and to design a better diagnosis and treatment plan. These multi-modal datasets provide valuable research materials for disease diagnosis. Moreover, data-driven solutions, such as disease diagnosis methods based on data mining, deep learning, and advanced artificial intelligence (AI), have also garnered significant attention recently (8). Experts can train a model using the aforementioned diagnostic data to predict diseases or prioritize disease risk genes, thereby improving diagnostic accuracy. However, such models often face shortcomings in terms of generalization and deployment (9). To enhance the model’s versatility and accessibility for physicians, rare disease diagnostic tools based on Foundation Models (such as Large Language Models (LLMs) (10) and Visual Language Models (VLMS) (11)) have also been developed. LLMs are pre-trained with a large-scale text corpus and can generalize into different tasks in natural language processing (NLP) with techniques of post-training. LLMs can process electronic health records (EHRs) from patients and make diagnoses accordingly (12, 13), and multiple LLMs with different roles can also work together as an agent system (14, 15). Such an AI agent can make diagnoses by simulating the real scenarios, leveraging prior knowledge, and providing recommendations and suggestions for physicians as medical AI assistants (16, 17). Several AI-based tools have been developed for rare disease diagnosis. For example, a general base-line for rare disease diagnosis will be prompting LLMs discussed in RareBench (18), and RareArena (19). Researchers also consider developing AI agents for medical usage based on techniques such as knowledge-enhanced retrieval (20) as well as multi-agent communication (21, 22). Although these models are interesting in design and have some clinical significance, their shortcomings are still quite evident. First, even advanced AI-based models used for rare disease diagnosis cannot distinguish be-tween common and rare diseases, which is the basic step to avoid misdiagnosis (Supplementary Figure 1 (a)). This finding severely limits the applicability of rare disease diagnostic models. Sec-ond, due to the randomness that exists in the model training and inference, these models might not give consistent outputs based on the same input with different random seeds, which is also harm-ful for the trustworthy output (Supplementary Figure 1 (b)). Third, current AI methods only focus on diagnosis, but lack the necessary steps and capacities for result interpretation and discovery of important causal genes of rare diseases. Finally, current studies (5, 8, 23) do not directly address how these AI models can be applied in diagnostic scenarios and collaborate with physicians. More-over, recent studies have shown that over 80% of rare diseases are influenced by genetic factors and can be passed on to the next generation (5), but how these genetic factors are incorporated into diagnosis and how to infer disease-related genes based on clinical presentation have not been well researched in AI-based methods. Therefore, there is a critical need to design an AI model that can simultaneously diagnose different types of diseases and provide explanations for the decision. In this manuscript, we introduce Hygieia, which is an AI agent for disease diagnosis and interpre-tation. Our model breaks down the diagnostic process into multiple stages, first determining the disease type, then designing distinct diagnostic approaches for common and rare diseases. Diagnos-ing common diseases is based on prompting LLMs. Meanwhile, due to the complexity of rare disease diagnosis, our agent utilizes multiple tools (such as website searching as well as patient retrieval) to leverage prior knowledge and make a decision. We have two innovations in the design of this agent. First, to resolve the inconsistency, our agent has a verifier to monitor the outputs of the main body of Hygieia and ensure the results converge. Second, to improve the transparency of using AI agents for making clinical decisions, we implement a framework with a reasoning trajectory and confidence estimation to help users understand and trust this workflow. Hygieia can accept multiple modali-ties or types of data as inputs, such as phenotype information, gene information, medical history, and other information. We also provided a table in Appendix A to distinguish Hygieia versus other AI agents focusing on (rare) disease diagnosis, and the unique components (case router, confidence estimation, and multi-task capacity) of Hygieia further enhance its novelty. 

> 2A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

In general, Hygieia can interpret diagnosis results with trackable reasoning paths and prioritize disease-associated risk genes, providing more informative feedback as references to help physicians make decisions and recommendations. Hygieia can also be integrated as a skill to improve the harness of frontier AI Agents in the diagnosis of rare diseases. We invite genetic physicians with verification from Yale School of Medicine and DUKE-NUS Medical School to evaluate the contribution of Hygieia as an effective medical AI assistant, and explore new directions for the diagnosis of rare diseases at the age of AI and digital health. 

2. Results 

Method overview. For each patient, we collect the annotations from phenotypes, medical records, and genetic test records as the input of Hygieia, and then make a decision based on the prior knowl-edge in medical research retrieved from the internet and databases. To initiate the workflow, Hy-gieia will first compute the probability of disease type based on a router, and then determine the most suitable pipeline for diagnosing either common or rare diseases. The pipeline used for rare disease diagnosis is more complex and involves several agents, such as a knowledge-retrieval agent, an information-extraction agent, a summary agent, and a verification agent. Hygieia also infers the risk gene based on patient-level phenotypes or medical records, as an extra function for medical geneticists. Finally, we provide the confidence level of the model output through a majority voting approach. The input data types, workflow, and application scenarios of Hygieia are summarized in Figure 1. Our benchmarking datasets include MyGene2 (24), four splits from RareBench (18) (RAMEDIS, MME, HMS, and LIRICCAL), RareArena (19), and in-house data from Yale School of Medicine (YSM) and Yale New Haven Hospitals (YNHH) used for the comparison between human experts and Hygieia. 

Hygieia serves as a strong medical agent for disease diagnosis. We first demonstrate the strong capacity of Hygieia serving as a virtual physician, supported by validations conducted from various clinical datasets with different sources. The accuracy of disease classification is much higher than us-ing random guess or prompting LLMs (Supplementary Figure 2 (a)), which shows the advantages of having a router to set up a simpler pipeline for common disease diagnosis. Our classifier also predicts accurately for the correct disease types not only in our held-out testing split, but also external vali-dation datasets (MyGene2 and RareBench), shown in Supplementary Figure 2 (b). We also visualize the distribution of embeddings with Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (25) in Supplementary Figure 2 (c), colored by disease types, where we see a clear difference between samples with rare diseases and samples with common diseases, which works as an explanation for our contribution. The diagnosis of rare diseases is more difficult, and we collect seven datasets in our evaluation pipeline. Figure 2 (a) shows the distribution of case numbers across all datasets, while Figure 2 (b) shows the unique number of diseases in different datasets. These figures show that our selected datasets have obvious differences in data distribution, which helps us simulate the clinical usage in the real-world setting. Among these datasets, RAMEDIS, MME, HMS, and LIRICAL are ex-tracted from RareBench, which is a public benchmark framework for evaluating the performance of models for rare disease diagnosis. MyGene2 contains family-level information for patients with rare diseases, which is also publicly available. RareArena is a newly collected dataset for evaluating LLMs’ performances in rare disease diagnosis. The YSM dataset contains five in-house samples as a part of Undiagnosed Diseases Network (UDN) (26), which covers diseases that are hard to diagnose. This dataset is not directly accessible to public researchers to protect personal information. Regarding baseline methods, we also consider a group with strong diversity. Our baselines include LLMs with/without reasoning and searching capacities, agents for biomedical research, and LLMs finetuned with simulated patient-level data from (27) with the open-source Qwen3 model (28). 

> 3

A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization a

b

Input information 

Medical record 

Phenotypes 

Genomic test 

> Optional
> Optional

Disease diagnosis 

Gene prioritization     

> To determine the most likely disease, we need to follow:
> 1. Search for the implemented functions that can assist in diagnosing a
> disease based on phenotypes.
> 2. Use a relevant function to perform a disease diagnosis based on the
> provided phenotypes.
> 3. …
> The final diagnosis is 46, XX Testicular Disorders of Sex Development .
> To identify potential genetic disorders, Let's outline the plan:
> 1. Confirm that the API key is correctly set up in your environment.
> 2. Prepare the query using the provided phenotypes.
> 3. Use the API to run the query and retrieve potential genetic disorders.
> 4. Analyze the results to identify potential genetic disorders…
> The final gene rank for top 5 genes is A,B,C,D …
> Reference
> Toolbox
> Expert
> resources

Workflow of Hygieia :

Query 

Information Digital Parser 

Task 

Router 

If: gene identify 

If: common 

disease 

If: rare 

disease Diagnosis 

Agent 

Diagnosis 

Result 

Tool 

Retriever 

Pipeline for rare disease diagnosis&gene prioritization 

Web 

Searcher 

Knowledge 

Manager 

Patient 

Searcher 

Summary 

Agent 

Verification 

Agent 

Self -Verification Diagnosis 

Result 

Validation with both simulation 

and real datasets! 

c Details of Agents: 

Summary 

Agent 

Use LLMs to 

summarize 

context info. 

Tool 

Retriever 

Search and call 

different tools. 

Knowledge 

Manager 

Collect and 

clean prior 

knowledge. 

Digital 

Parser 

Regular 

expression -

based filter. 

Web 

Searcher 

Search 

information 

from internet. 

Patient 

Searcher 

Search in -

house 

patient info. 

Task 

Router 

Route to the 

right pipeline. 

Verification 

Agent 

Use LLMs to 

verify agent 

outcomes. 

> Confidence

Gene 

Result 

> Confidence

Details of evaluations 

d

Metric -

driven 

Expert -

involved 

Hygieia 

Figure 1: Overall pipeline of Hygieia. (a) Here we showcase how Hygieia can help physicians and clinicians working on two important problems in rare disease analysis, including diagnosis and risk gene prioritization. (b) The workflow of the AI Agent pipeline. We have multiple components, first routing the AI agents with correct models based on inferred disease type, and then providing diagnosis outcomes as well as confidence. (c) We provide the detailed information of each component in our AI agent. (d) Our evaluation criteria, including numerical evaluation and human evaluation, to support mimicking the scenario of clinical application. 

4A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization a

c

d

b

Figure 2: Benchmarking results for Hygieia in rare disease diagnosis. (a) Number of cases in our testing datasets. (b) Number of diseases in our testing datasets. (c) Top1 recall rate across different datasets. (d) Comparisons of different models with different recall rates in MyGene2. 

> 5A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

Details of our baseline methods can be found in the Methods section. During evaluation, we test the Recall rate by comparing the observed diseases with the predicted dis-eases from different methods. Figure 2 (c) shows that Hygieia outperforms various baseline methods across datasets from different resources. Fine-tuning LLMs for disease diagnosis also does not have strong generalization ability, and thus cannot outperform most of the agent-based solutions. More-over, since some rare diseases have similar phenotypes or can be treated similarly (29), we also test if increasing the size of predicted targets (e.g., top 5 and top 10 diseases) can improve the Recall rate. Figure 2 (d) shows our results based on the MyGene2 dataset, where Hygieia had a higher recall rate when we increased the testing size. We report the benchmarking results based on a randomly sampled subset from RareArena in Supplementary Figure 3, where Hygieia still presents a leading performance even under the evaluation settings with an advanced dataset. At the same time, not all methods exhibit this phenomenon, which is counterintuitive. This might indicate that the approach of some models taken to clinical decision-making may still be primarily based on guesswork, with reasoning playing a secondary role. However, by integrating the prior knowledge and introducing the self-reflection design, Hygieia achieves a better result in diagnosing rare diseases. We also test the reliability of estimated confidence, shown in Supplementary Figure 4 (a). Our expectation is that Hygieia has higher confidence for questions with correct answers. Our results demonstrate that 1. the confidence proposed by Hygieia is reliable, as the answer group with higher confidence also has a higher recall rate, and 2. other confidence estimation methods are worse than the current design, shown in Supplementary Figure 4 (b) as the rest of three methods cannot produce significant differences between these two groups. We also test the robustness of Hygieia by using three different random seeds for querying, and based on Supplementary Figure 5, we do not observe a large difference across the outcomes with three different runs. 

Case study of Hygieia for disease diagnosis shows its unique and informative decision-making process. To understand the decision-making process of Hygieia and make an in-depth comparison with other baseline methods, we provide a case study with MyGene2. In this sample, we provide phenotypes and detected genes as inputs; the diagnosis is Distal arthrogryposis, type 10 . The full reasoning path of Hygieia can be found in Supplementary Figure 6 (a). Based on Figure 3 and among all evaluated methods, Hygieia is the only model that correctly made the definitive diagnosis Distal arthrogryposis, type 10 , fully matching both the annotated answer and the genetic etiology ( TTN mutation). In contrast, alternative baselines either provide incorrect diagnoses (e.g., Bethlem myopathy, Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, Flexion contracture, Arthro-gryposis multiplex congenita ) or produce overly broad, nonspecific conclusions. This demonstrates that Hygieia not only retrieves the correct disease category but is capable of fine-grained subtype resolution, as an essential requirement in precision medicine. Unlike other models, Hygieia has a multi-step reasoning process that integrates phenotypic patterns, risk gene associations, and syndrome specificity. This demonstrates a higher level of biomedical causal interpretability. While several baselines refuse to show internal reasoning or default to vague clinical summaries, Hygieia transparently links phenotype, genotype, and nosology, exhibiting a cognitively valid chain of inference. This specific case intentionally includes multiple phenotypes designed to confound rule-based or pattern-matching systems. Models like o4-mini, GPT-4o, and Qwen3-8B fail to integrate the constel-lation of findings, instead overfitting to a single clinical feature (e.g., toe walking, wrist contracture )and outputting unrelated diagnoses. Hygieia, however, successfully recognizes that the multi-joint congenital contracture pattern represents a diagnostic signature of distal arthrogryposis, showing resilience to feature redundancy and phenotypic noise. 

> 6A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

Question: Make diagnosis for this patient. The phenotypes include: …, Flexion contracture of toe. 

Multiple local hospital evaluations failed to establish a definitive diagnosis. You should return the reasoning process with format <thinking></thinking> and return the top one diseases with format <answer></answer>. 

Annotated answer: Distal arthrogryposis, type 10. 

Reason: I'm sorry, but I can’t share my detailed step-by-step reasoning. Here is a brief summary of the key factors considered: Suggested next steps: 

serum CK (often normal/mildly ↑)… 

Answer: Bethlem myopathy (collagen VI–related 

myopathy; COL6A1/COL6A2/COL6A3). 

o4mini 

GPT-5 (search) 

Reason: I can’t share my step-by-step internal reasoning, but here’s a concise clinical summary. The constellation of early/elusive flexion contractures—elbow, wrist, hip—with toe walking from tight Achilles tendons is most characteristic of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). 

Answer: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. 

Deepseek-v31 

Reason: The patient presents with multiple joint contractures (elbow flexion, hip, wrist flexion, toe 

flexion, and toe walking), which are hallmark 

features of several congenital and neuromuscular 

conditions. Key considerations include:…This is a congenital condition characterized by… 

Answer: Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita. 

Reason: We have multiple congenital joint contractures (elbow flexion, hip, wrist, toe walking = 

plantarflexion). Evaluations inconclusive. Top consideration is arthrogryposis multiplex congenita 

(AMC), specifically … 

Answer: Based on the noted constellation of findings— congenital… 

GPT-4o (search) 

Qwen3-8B 

Biomni 

Reason: The PubMed search did not return any results for the query combining all the phenotypes. This suggests that there might not be a specific, well-documented disease that exactly matches all of these phenotypes 

together in the available literature… 

Answer: Flexion contracture 

Hygieia 

Reason : Step 1: Summarize key input data** \n- **Phenotypes:** \n - Elbow flexion contracture \n - Hip contracture \n - Toe walking \n - Wrist flexion contracture \n - Flexion contracture (general) \n - Flexion contracture of toe \n\n- **Risk gene:** TTN (Titin)…TTN mutations are known to cause several muscle -related disorders, including congenital myopathies and distal arthrogryposis syndromes. \n - Distal arthrogryposis 

syndromes are…DA10 specifically involves... \n- TTN gene association strengthens the link to DA10… 

Answer: Distal arthrogryposis type 10 

Green means right info.  Red means wrong info. 

Reason: The patient presents with multiple flexion contractures affecting the elbows, hips, wrists, and toes, along with toe walking. These are characteristic features of a neuromuscular or musculoskeletal disorder. Multiple flexion 

contractures at multiple joints suggest a … 

Answer: Distal Arthrogryposis. 

Figure 3: Case study of Hygieia and other baselines in disease diagnosis. We mask some phenotypes to protect personal information. 

> 7A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

We also select a challenging example from the YNHH to demonstrate Hygieia’s potential for solving complex problems. According to Supplementary Figure 7, Hygieia successfully makes the diagnosis of Kabuki Syndrome, including subtypes related to genes based on the iteration steps. Based on the prevalence, only 1 in 32,000 births results in Kabuki syndrome (30), making it a very rare and challenging case, and demonstrating the potential of Hygieia for handling difficult samples and very rare cases. Where competing models either offer no next steps or suggest non-specific investigations, Hygieia explicitly ties the diagnosis to a recognized molecular driver and its associated disease spectrum. This strengthens the translational value of its output, enabling downstream steps such as confir-matory genetic testing, family counseling, and prognosis stratification. The output is not merely a label, but clinically operational knowledge, surpassing the diagnostic passivity of baseline systems. Taken together, the evidence indicates that Hygieia demonstrates a substantially higher standard of diagnostic precision, biomedical reasoning depth, and clinical applicability compared to both tra-ditional LLM baselines and search-augmented systems. Its ability to unify phenotypic complexity with molecular knowledge exemplifies the next generation of AI-assisted medical decision systems, thereby positioning Hygieia as the most reliable and clinically aligned model in this evaluation. 

Hygieia successfully prioritizes genes with higher disease risks from individual-level data. To enhance diagnostic interpretability and confidence while providing additional therapeutic insights, modern medicine often aims to identify causative factors (31). In rare disease diagnosis, some physi-cians may recommend exome- or whole-genome sequencing or targeted gene sequencing to identify disease-causing variants, enabling more reliable conclusions (32). Therefore, determining how to provide patients with a list of potential genes for sequencing represents a critical task in rare disease diagnosis. However, few AI agent frameworks have considered this task. Our analysis indicates that disease diagnosis shares similarities with risk factor prioritization, suggesting it can be addressed using a unified framework. Here, our input data are still phenotypes or EHR data, while the out-put will be a gene or a list of genes. Our selected baselines are similar to the candidates used for evaluating disease diagnosis functions. Details can be found in the Methods section. Due to the scarcity of datasets containing both phenotypes and true disease-causing genes, this sec-tion employs MyGene2 and simulation data provided by SHEPHERD (27) for model evaluation. The statistics of selected datasets are summarized in Figure 4 (a). The scale of simulation data is larger than MyGene2, and thus our assessment also took various scenarios into account. We still computed the Recall rate based on gene lists of different sizes and observed gene labels. Figures 4 (b) and (c) show that Hygieia has a high recall rate, especially under the top 1 setting versus other baselines. However, as we increase the pool of candidates, there is a diminishing advantage of Hygieia. When comparing the recall rate of this task to disease diagnosis, we observe that gene prioritization is a relatively simpler task. Consequently, as the pool of candidates expands, the benefits of employing agents (e.g., additional verifiers) diminish proportionally. Considering that the more genes that need to be tested, the higher the cost for patients, our approach balances accuracy and expense. We also compared the costs of Hygieia and GPT-5-search, revealing that Hygieia holds an advantage in to-ken consumption as well, shown in Supplementary Figure 8. In Figure 4 (c), since we can create a training dataset from the large simulation data, we can also create an oracle model (Qwen3-8B-sft, score is 0.724). However, the performance of this model for recommending based on MyGene2 is poor, suggesting that AI Agents have better generalization ability than traditional SFT approaches. 

Case study of Hygieia for gene ranking shows its unique and informative decision-making pro-cess. To understand the decision-making process of Hygieia and make an in-depth comparison versus other baseline methods, we provided a case study with one sample from MyGene2, but for risk gene prioritization. In this sample, we provided phenotypes as inputs; the observed risk gene is NALCN .

> 8A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

# a

# b

# c

Figure 4: Benchmarking results for Hygieia in risk gene prioritization. (a) Statistics in our testing datasets. (b) Top1 recall rate across different datasets. (c) Comparisons of different models with different recall rates in MyGene2. 

> 9A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

The full reasoning path of Hygieia can be found in Supplementary Figure 6 (b). According to Figure 5, in this evaluation, Hygieia is the only system that successfully identifies NALCN, which is the correct gene associated with the patient’s constellation of phenotypes, fully aligning with the annotated ground truth. All other baseline models, including o4mini, GPT-4o (search), GPT-5 (search), Qwen3-8B, and DeepSeek-v31, either returned incorrect candidates such as MYH3 or PIEZO2 , or failed to provide a usable response altogether. This example demonstrates that Hygieia consistently outperforms both general-purpose LLMs and search-augmented tools in high-stakes biomedical inference tasks requiring precise gene–phenotype matching. Unlike competing models that default to MYH3 based on superficial resemblance to Freeman–Sheldon syndrome, Hygieia distinguishes clinically overlapping yet genetically distinct disorders by integrat-ing phenotypic, molecular, and nosological evidence. The model explicitly links the observed fea-tures—including congenital contractures, hypotonia, neurodevelopmental delay, and characteristic facies, which are NALCN-associated CLIFAHDD/IHPRF syndromes. This indicates that Hygieia does not rely solely on phenotypic pattern matching, but instead performs multi-layered biomedical rea-soning consistent with genetic counseling practice. Several baselines fail due to inability to retrieve or interpret data, producing unusable outputs (“NAN", “unable to retrieve data"). Hygieia remains fully functional even under incomplete signal, reflecting robustness to real-world clinical constraints, where patient phenotypes may be sparsely documented, noisy, or partially overlapping. This resilience is essential for deployment in clinical decision support, where diagnostic completeness is rarely guaranteed. Hygieia not only outputs the correct target gene but also contextualizes it within a clinically action-able diagnostic category. This stands in sharp contrast to competing models that provide unsubstan-tiated gene names without justification, which would be unacceptable in a clinical genetics workflow where gene testing decisions have financial, ethical, and prognostic implications. Hygieia’s inter-pretability and biological validity, therefore, make it a more trustworthy candidate for integration into precision medicine pipelines. The comparison clearly illustrates that Hygieia surpasses existing LLM-based and search-augmented baselines in terms of accuracy, reasoning validity, and clinical relevance. Its ability to discriminate among phenotypically similar developmental syndromes and return a gene with direct translational value underscores its potential as a next-generation AI system for genetic factor prioritization. 

Utilizing Hygieia as a medical assistant for physicians in solving complicated cases. One major goal of developing and deploying Hygieia is to make a virtual assistant (Copilot) for physicians and clinicians working on rare disease diagnosis and treatment development, and thus, matching user requirements with the functionality of Hygieia is a crucial step. Previous medical AI agent develop-ment has not explored this area extensively, thereby limiting their specific deployment capabilities. In this work, we collaborated with physicians from Duke-NUS, YSM, and YNHH to define key stake-holders in disease diagnosis/gene prioritization, and chart a blueprint for human-AI collaboration, thereby providing a guidance framework for the concrete implementation of Hygieia. Figure 6 (a) shows two expected functions of Hygieia from physicians to improve the efficiency and reduce the effort, including direct diagnosis based on physician input, and verification and refinement of physician judgments. The commonality between these two tasks is that both require interaction between the physician and the AI agent, where the physician articulates the character’s needs, and the agent fulfills them. We also provide some examples here to showcase how we can use Hygieia to accomplish these tasks. In Figure 6 (b), we illustrate that Hygieia can take the physicians’ instructions with patient phenotype information (free text format) and other relevant information as inputs, and integrate its different components to create a pipeline, call different tools, and communicate 

> 10 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

Question: Consider you are a genetic counselor. The phenotype description of the patient is The 

phenotypes include: … Can you suggest a list of top 1 possible genes to test? Please return gene 

symbols as a comma separated list. Example: 'ABC1, BRAC2, BRAC1' or “not applicable” if you cannot provide the result. 

Annotated answer: NALCN 

Reason: NAN. 

Answer: MYH3. 

o4mini 

GPT-5 (search) 

Reason: NAN. 

Answer: MYH3. 

Deepseek-v31 

Reason: NAN. 

Answer: MYH3. 

Reason: Based on the phenotype description provided, it would be appropriate to consider testing the gene associated with Freeman-Sheldon syndrome. The key features such as "whistling face" 

(pursed lips, full cheeks)… 

Answer: MYH3. 

GPT-4o (search) 

Qwen3-8B 

Biomni 

Reason: It appears there is still an issue with executing commands or accessing the data. Given these constraints, I am unable to retrieve the necessary data to suggest a list of possible 

genes for the provided phenotypes… 

Answer: MYH3. 

Hygieia 

Reason: From the context: NALCN-related congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia, and 

developmental delay syndrome (CLIFAHDD)** and also infantile hypotonia with psychomotor retardation and 

characteristic facies (IHPRF). NALCN mutations produce…Given that the phenotypic match is very high with 

CLIFAHDD / IHPRF due to NALCN mutations and the context explicitly mentions NALCN… 

Answer: NALCN. 

Green means right info.  Red means wrong info. 

Reason: NAN. 

Answer: PIEZO2. 

Figure 5: Case study for Hygieia and other baselines in risk gene prioritization. We mask some phenotypes to protect personal information. 

> 11 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

with different AI agents to produce a diagnosis result. In Figure 6 (c), we showcase how Hygieia can take the physicians’ diagnosis results as well as phenotype information as inputs, and by using an alternative best pipeline, first determine the True/False or original diagnosis, and then perform reasoning and correction, to report a new diagnosis answer. We also invite three certified genetic physicians as experts in pediatrics and rare disease diagnosis to have a competition with Hygieia based on the two selected tasks discussed in this manuscript. Their training backgrounds are summarized in Supplementary File 1 to justify their strong exper-tise. We assigned the same question sets for human experts and Hygieia, allowing them to access the same resources (but human experts are not allowed to use LLMs as assistants), and make a direct comparison in their abilities for problem solving. According to Figure 6 (d), Hygieia performs bet-ter than all selected human experts in both rare disease diagnosis and gene prioritization, and the improvements versus the second-best expert are 12.49% and 60%, respectively. Human experts also have comments that gene prioritization is more difficult than disease diagnosis, supported by the difference in the improvement. Regarding the efficiency, Hygieia only spends less than two hours in solving all of the selected questions, while human experts take from two hours to 10 hours to answer all questions, shown in Figure 6 (e). Therefore, AI-based medical assistants are able to pro-vide feedback more quickly; this capacity could be very valuable, especially in cases related to timely decisions. Finally, we show a case study for the previously mentioned challenging case, the Kabuki syndrome, and analyze the reasons from human experts and Hygieia to make a diagnosis. According to Figure 6 (f), human experts prefer giving reasons with conciseness, and selecting highly-relevant phenotypes to make a diagnosis. However, Hygieia prefers generating a more structured reasoning path with hierarchy and boldfacing the important information. Therefore, Hygieia can facilitate rea-soning for disease diagnosis with an easier approach to understanding and analysis, especially for junior physicians and medical students learning the diagnosis process. The robust performance of Hygieia, reflected in both its reasoning process and diagnostic outputs, to-gether with its advantage over human experts in comparative evaluations demonstrates its potential to translate into tangible medical value for healthcare teams, further highlighting its dual contribu-tions at both the algorithmic and application levels. Moving forward, we will involve physicians as human evaluators to directly compare Hygieia with physicians in tasks such as disease diagnosis and key gene identification, thus further extending Hygieia. 

> 12

A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization a

Please help me make diagnosis for this patient: … 

Sure, based on the information, my diagnosis is …

Confidence: 0.9 

We have one diagnosis record from other teams, please validate it:… 

Sure, based on the input data, the diagnosis is wrong and the most possible disease is… 

b

Make diagnosis for this patient. The phenotypes include: Elbow flexion contracture… Multiple local hospital evaluations failed to establish a definitive diagnosis. 

Digital Parser  Task 

Router 

Phenotype Searcher  Knowledge Manager 

Summary 

Agent 

Verification 

Agent 

X round till convergence 

The diagnosis process has provided a list of potential diseases that align with the given phenotypes. Now, I will clean the names of the top ten diseases and return them in the specified format. 1. [ ✓] Search for implemented functions to identify any relevant tools for disease diagnosis based on phenotypes. 2. [ ✓] Use the appropriate function to perform the diagnosis based on the given phenotypes. 3. [ ✓] Retrieve and clean the names of the top ten diseases linked to the provided phenotypes. 4. The final answer is: …. 

c We have one diagnosis record from other teams for one patient. The phenotypes include: Elbow flexion contracture… The diagnosis result is: Spastic Diplegia / Spastic Quadriplegia. Check if the conclusion is correct or not. 

Planner  Digital Parser  Web Searcher 

Knowledge Manager 

Summary 

Agent 

Verification 

Agent 

Y round till convergence 

Based on the adjusted phenotype analysis, the proposed diagnosis of “Spastic Diplegia / Spastic Quadriplegia (Cerebral Palsy spectrum)” does not align with the phenotypic presentation. The corrected diagnosis is: Diagnosis Assessment: Incorrect Final Diagnosis:  Distal Arthrogryposis Type 10 (DA10) . Reasoning: - Key phenotype–diagnosis mismatch: 

Request 

Process 

Answer 

Request 

Process 

Answer 

d

e

f

Gene 

Searcher 

69.23 

80.00 

30.77  30.00 

38.46 

50.00 

61.54 

20.00 

0.00 

10.00 

20.00 

30.00 

40.00 

50.00 

60.00 

70.00 

80.00 

90.00 

ACC (Disease)  ACC (Gene) 

Human-AI Comparison 

Hygieia  H1  H2  H3 

> Score

1.92 

10.67 

2.00 

5.75 

0.00 

2.00 

4.00 

6.00 

8.00 

10.00 

12.00 

Hygieia  H1  H2  H3 

Time Cost (days) 

> Time

Characterised by broad eyebrows, large ears, sparse eyebrow, clinodactyly, brachydactyly, seizures, microcephaly, growth retardation… 

Selected physician diagnosis 

Key Phenotypic Signature 

The most discriminative feature cluster is:… 

Distinctive facial gestalt Multisystem involvement Neurodevelopmental impairment 

→ Intellectual disability + hypotonia + seizures 

Additional supportive features 

→ Growth retardation, joint hypermobility, hematologic abnormalities 

Diagnostic Interpretation 

The phenotype is highly consistent with a Kabuki syndrome spectrum disorder… 

Hygieia diagnosis process 

Figure 6: Illustration of Human-AI collaboration for disease diagnosis and decision correction based on physicians and Hygieia. We mask phenotype information to protect patients’ privacy. (a) Explana-tions of two selected tasks; (b) Illustration of the diagnosis of diseases based on physician input; (c) Illustration of verification and refinement of physician judgments. (d) Human-AI comparison results for two tasks, H1-H3, represent human experts. (e) Time cost comparison result. (f) Case study for outcomes from our agent and human experts. 

3. Discussion 

Accurate and timely diagnosis remains a fundamental challenge in modern medicine, particularly for rare and genetically heterogeneous diseases where phenotypic overlap, incomplete records, and lim-ited clinician exposure often result in prolonged diagnostic odysseys and misdiagnoses. While recent advances in LLMs and biomedical AI have demonstrated promise in clinical reasoning, most existing approaches focus narrowly on either pattern-based disease prediction or retrieval-augmented ques-tion answering, without addressing the full diagnostic workflow, interpretability, or clinical deploy-ment constraints. In this work, we present Hygieia, a versatile multi-modal agentic system designed to jointly address disease diagnosis and risk gene prioritization by integrating phenotypic, genomic, and contextual clinical information within a unified framework powered by AI. Overall, Hygieia introduces several conceptual and technical advances that collectively address the above challenges. First, it formalizes diagnosis as a multi-stage agentic workflow, beginning with task parsing and disease-type routing, followed by tailored pipelines for common and rare diseases. By explicitly separating these pathways, Hygieia avoids over-generalized reasoning and reduces both 

13 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 

computational cost and diagnostic error for common conditions, while allocating more sophisti-cated reasoning resources to rare disease cases. Second, the system incorporates a self-verification mechanism that iteratively evaluates and corrects intermediate diagnostic outputs until convergence. This verifier–corrector design substantially improves consistency and robustness, mitigating the well-documented randomness of LLM-based inference. Empirically, this design leads to more stable pre-dictions, and we also provide better-calibrated confidence estimates with multiple queries. Third, Hygieia extends beyond diagnosis to risk gene prioritization, framing it as a closely related inference task that benefits from the same phenotypic and contextual reasoning. By unifying these tasks in a single framework, we produce clinically actionable outputs that can directly empower several asso-ciated tasks. Fourth, Hygieia also emphasizes interpretability and clinical alignment. Rather than producing opaque predictions or generic summaries, our system explicitly links phenotypes, disease entities, and gene-level evidence through multi-step reasoning trajectories. Moreover, Hygieia is evaluated not only through comprehensive benchmarks across diverse datasets with imbalanced and noisy data as inputs, but also through human-in-the-loop studies with practicing physicians, demonstrating its utility as a diagnostic assistant and verifier of clinician judgments. We not only test the performances of Hygieia versus human experts in selected tasks, but also showcase several case studies to demonstrate the contribution of Human-AI collaboration. This dual evaluation strategy strengthens the translational relevance of the proposed system. Despite its strong performance, Hygieia has several limitations that warrant discussion. First, it relies heavily on the capabilities of underlying LLMs, many of which are closed-source and subject to evolving behaviors, cost structures, and access constraints. Second, while Hygieia demonstrates strong generalization across datasets, its evaluation is still constrained by the availability and quality of labeled rare disease data, particularly for gene-level ground truth. Simulation datasets are not enough to directly validate their real-world applications in more complicated scenarios. In the future, we will focus on extending Hygieia via more flexible model selection as well as constructing more datasets for the agentic system training and validation. 

4. Methods 

Problem definition. Here we intend to design a specific agentic system for disease-relevant analysis, including disease diagnosis and risk factor (such as gene) prioritization. Our agent system A can take the following information as inputs, including task-specific prompts 𝑅 _𝑥 , phenotypes 𝑃 _𝑥 , functional and/or genetic information of risked genes 𝐺 , and medical record information 𝐶 . For the problem of disease diagnosis, this system makes inference with 𝑂 𝑖 = A ( 𝑅 𝑑 , 𝑃 𝑖 , 𝐺 𝑖 , 𝐶 𝑖 ) for the patient 𝑖 , and the diagnosis result will be the output. Similarly, for risk gene prioritization, we replace the task-specific prompt 𝑅 𝑑 with 𝑅 𝑔 , and the output will be the prioritized gene. The model output not only contains the expected diseases or genes (in string), but also the confidence of making such a decision ranging from 0-100. 

Workflow of Hygieia. Our workflow contains four main stages, including task-specific planning ,

information retrieval and integration , self-reflection-based validation , and confidence estimation . By default, most agents are implemented using GPT-5 (33) as their backbone after considering the trade-off among model performance, cost, and protection of patient privacy. We use Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (34) as the backbone of our verification agent to reduce model bias. We have discussed the ablation studies in the Methods section to justify our settings. Regarding task-specific planning , we can integrate information proposed by known biomedical databases and divide the main task into several steps, based on Biomni (35). The agent will parse the input information first, and search the current tool base developed based on both tools in Biomni and 

> 14 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

newly implemented searching functions. It will then determine the correct tool for addressing the given task. We do not map phenotypes with HPO terms (36) as we assume that our agent (based on advanced LLMs) already knows related information. Regarding the difference in diagnosing common and rare diseases, we train a classifier-based router to make more precise diagnoses and reduce cost based on a KNN classifier (37). This stage is performed by the parser and the router component. Regarding information retrieval and integration , we search the related information of phenotypes and possible gene names as well as gene functions based on web-searching tools, and the data sources in-cluding Google, Google Scholar, and PubMed (38). Specific human variants and related information are not included in the current version due to the protection of privacy. We also allow the advanced searching tool in LLMs such as the web-searching tools in GPT-4o (39) and GPT-5 (33). Here, we consider searching the top 𝐾 = 5 patients from known databases with diagnosis information as refer-ences. After collecting the necessary information, we will integrate the prior knowledge as inputs for the next component in this system. This task is finished by the knowledge-manager, web-searcher, and patient-retriever components. Regarding self-reflection-based validation , we provide the diagnosis decision as well as methods for validation. The summary agent in our system will utilize the information from the previous two stages and generate a clinical decision. After making the decision based on the summary agent, we introduce our verification agent, which takes the prior knowledge and the output of the summary agent as input and validates whether the result is correct or incorrect (40). If the result is incorrect, the prompt used for the summary agent will update, and the summary agent will make a decision again, until the verification agent agrees with the decision or we reach the limit of tries. The algorithm of this system is shown in Algorithm 1, with the disease diagnosis task as an example. This task is finished by the summary-agent and verification-agent components. Regarding confidence estimation , we refer to the method introduced by (41), and we ask the summary agent 𝑠 times to get 𝑠 answers as well as 𝑠 paired confidence lists 𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, ..., 𝑐 𝑠 . We average the confi-dence levels and use the major voting result from these 𝑠 answers as the final decision. Therefore, the final confidence is 𝑐 𝑓 =  

> Í𝑠 𝑘 =1𝑐 𝑘
> 𝑠

. We have tried other methods, including summarization of logprobs, self-evaluation (42), and thinking-twice-before-answering (43), but their performances are not good enough to represent the confidence. Since most of the advanced LLMs are closed-source and black-box models, other approaches used for open-source LLMs are not applicable. We have performed statistical tests to demonstrate that our current settings can help us calibrate the model outputs. 

Ablation studies. In Supplementary Figures 9 (a) and (b), we show the contributions of adjusting the base models and the input information for these tasks. In both cases, changing the base models from GPT-4o to GPT-5 makes an obvious improvement, and incorporating more context, such as detailed phenotype descriptions, as well as having a verifier, can help Hygieia determine diseases and gene sets. We also find that providing disease information can help Hygieia rank genes; however, since in real clinical cases, physicians must know the results of the genetic tests and then make a diagnosis, we do not use this information as input for the prioritization of risk genes. 

Human-in-the-loop design. We also consider the comparison and collaboration between physicians and AI models in making decisions. We have invited four genetic physicians from YSM, YNHH, and Duke-NUS Medical School, and consider two scenarios. In our first experimental setting, we assign 23 questions (13 for disease diagnosis with 2 difficult questions related to extremely rare diseases, and 10 for gene prioritization) for X physicians and Hygieia, and evaluate the performances based on accuracy. In the second experimental setting, we allow Hygieia to access the results provided by physicians, and utilize Hygieia for verifying the decision from physicians. If the verification turns out with negative 

> 15 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

Algorithm 1 Verifier-Corrector Pipeline in Hygieia for disease diagnosis. 

Input: Question 𝑄 𝐴 , verify prompt 𝑇 𝑉 , model prompt 𝑇 𝐶 , number of iteration 𝑁 , knowledge query prompt 𝑇 𝐾 .

Helper Models: Verifier M𝑣 , diagnosis agent M𝑠 , router M𝑟 , knowledge extractor M𝑘 , knowl-edge manager M𝑚 , concatenation function ·||· .

Intermediate variable: Model output 𝑂 𝐴 , reasoning path 𝑂 𝑅 , external knowledge 𝐾 𝐴 .

Output: Verified model output 𝑂 𝐶 , reasoning output 𝑅 𝐴 .

1: INIT: initialize all parameters. 

2: if M𝑟 (𝑄 𝐴 ) is Common then 

3: 𝑂 𝐶 , 𝑅 𝐴 = M𝑠 (𝑇 𝐶 , 𝑄 𝐴 )

4: Return 𝑂 𝐶 , 𝑅 𝐴 

5: end if 

6: 𝐾 𝐴 = M𝑘 (𝑇 𝐾 , 𝑄 𝐴 )

7: 𝑂 𝐾 = M𝑚 (𝑇 𝐾 , 𝐾 𝐴 )

8: 𝑂 𝐴 , 𝑅 𝐴 = M𝑠 (𝑇 𝐶 , 𝑄 𝐴 || 𝑂 𝐾 )

9: for 𝑖 in 𝑁 steps do 

10: if M𝑣 (𝑇 𝑉 , 𝑄 𝐴 || 𝑂 𝐴 ) is True then 

11: 𝑂 𝐶 = 𝑂 𝐴 

12: Return 𝑂 𝐶 , 𝑅 𝐴 

13: else 

14: 𝑂 𝐴 , 𝑅 𝐴 = M𝑠 (𝑇 𝐶 , 𝑄 𝐴 || 𝑂 𝐾 )

15: end if 

16: end for 

17: 𝑂 𝐶 , 𝑅 𝐴 = M𝑠 (𝑇 𝐶 , 𝑄 𝐴 || 𝑂 𝐾 )

18: Return 𝑂 𝐶 , 𝑅 𝐴 

> 16 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

results, we will run the correction pipeline discussed in our Methods and Results section to update the decision. 

Case study investigation. To better demonstrate the advantages of Hygieia, we provide several case studies from different baseline methods and include the reasoning steps of Hygieia. In these questions, only Hygieia makes the correct decision, while the rest of the methods do not give us either correct reasoning paths or correct answers. 

Explanations of baseline methods. For closed-source models, we consider LLMs with reasoning capacities including o4-mini (44), GPT-5 (33), and GPT-5 (search) (33), advanced LLMs including GPT-4o (39) and GPT-4o (search) (39). For open-source models, we consider Qwen3-8B (28) and Deepseek-v3.1 (45). For domain-expert models, we consider a multi-agent diagnosis system (base model GPT-4o as the recommended setting), as well as DeepRare (5). However, DeepRare’s API ver-sion has bugs related to data processing, and we cannot find their released testing datasets, making it hard for us to retrieve the data format. For biomedical agents, we consider Biomni (base model GPT-4o as the recommended setting. For Qwen3-8B, we also consider fine-tuning the base model with both Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and full parameters (Full) (46) based on the provided sim-ulation data. The prompts used to query LRM and LLMs are documented in Appendix B. For other models, details can be found in our code base. 

Metrics. We follow the settings discussed in (5, 18), where the Recall @K is the main metric used in evaluating the generated disease diagnosis and gene rank results. We consider the top 1,5,10 can-didates and compute Recall @1, Recall @5, Recall @10, accordingly. We perform metric computation after disease name/gene name normalization. 

5. Code Availability and Data Availability 

We use the authorized OpenAI API, Claude API, and Gemini API to develop our method and perform benchmark studies. To fine-tune open-source LLMs, we use the Misha cluster from Wu Tsai Institute at Yale with one NVIDIA H100 GPU and 80GB of memory. The codes of Hygieia can be found in 

https://github.com/HelloWorldLTY/hygieia with the MIT license. All data are available online or upon request. We have summarized the download links of each dataset in Supplementary File 2. 

6. Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 

This project has received approval from Yale IRB, with project number 2000039055. 

7. Acknowledgment 

We acknowledge the support from the Undiagnosed Diseases Network. T.L. acknowledges the sup-port from the OpenAI Research Access Program. 

8. Author Contribution 

T.L. designed this study with W.Z. and H.Z. T.L. developed the method. T.L. performed experiments. B.K.G.K., H.Z., and J.L. performed human evaluations. All authors contributed to manuscript writing and reviewing. H.Z. supervised this project. 

> 17 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

References 

[1] Rodolfo Valdez, Lijing Ouyang, and Julie Bolen. Public health and rare diseases: oxymoron no more. Preventing chronic disease , 13:E05, 2016. [2] Stéphanie Nguengang Wakap, Deborah M Lambert, Annie Olry, Charlotte Rodwell, Charlotte Gueydan, Valérie Lanneau, Daniel Murphy, Yann Le Cam, and Ana Rath. Estimating cumulative point prevalence of rare diseases: analysis of the orphanet database. European journal of human genetics , 28(2):165–173, 2020. [3] Friedemann Paul. Hope for a rare disease: eculizumab in neuromyelitis optica. The Lancet Neurology , 12(6):529–531, 2013. [4] Anneliene H Jonker, Maria Cavaller-Bellaubi, Yukiko Nishimura, and David A Pearce. Access in the rare diseases landscape. The Lancet Global Health , 12(10):e1587, 2024. [5] Weike Zhao, Chaoyi Wu, Yanjie Fan, Xiaoman Zhang, Pengcheng Qiu, Yuze Sun, Xiao Zhou, Yanfeng Wang, Ya Zhang, Yongguo Yu, et al. An agentic system for rare disease diagnosis with traceable reasoning. Nature , 2026. [6] Tapan Ghosh. Artificial intelligence in rare disease diagnostics: Shortening the path to early detection. 2025. [7] Dong Dong, Roger Yat-Nork Chung, Rufina HW Chan, Shiwei Gong, and Richard Huan Xu. Why is misdiagnosis more likely among some people with rare diseases than others? insights from a population-based cross-sectional study in china. Orphanet journal of rare diseases , 15(1):307, 2020. [8] Junghwan Lee, Cong Liu, Junyoung Kim, Zhehuan Chen, Yingcheng Sun, James R Rogers, Wendy K Chung, and Chunhua Weng. Deep learning for rare disease: A scoping review. Journal of biomedical informatics , 135:104227, 2022. [9] Matteo Rossi and Aisha El-Sayed. Meta-learning driven few-shot diagnostics: Addressing rare disease classification in medical ai. International Journal of Advanced Artificial Intelligence Re-search , 2(05):7–14, 2025. [10] Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez, Ting Fang Tan, and Daniel Shu Wei Ting. Large language models in medicine. Nature medicine ,29(8):1930–1940, 2023. [11] Chunyu Liu, Yixiao Jin, Zhouyu Guan, Tingyao Li, Yiming Qin, Bo Qian, Zehua Jiang, Yilan Wu, Xiangning Wang, Ying Feng Zheng, et al. Visual–language foundation models in medicine. 

The Visual Computer , 41(4):2953–2972, 2025. [12] Abeed Sarker, Rui Zhang, Yanshan Wang, Yunyu Xiao, Sudeshna Das, Dalton Schutte, David Oniani, Qianqian Xie, and Hua Xu. Natural language processing for digital health in the era of large language models. Yearbook of Medical Informatics , 33(01):229–240, 2024. [13] Tianyu Liu, Yijia Xiao, Xiao Luo, Hua Xu, Wenjin Zheng, and Hongyu Zhao. Geneverse: A col-lection of open-source multimodal large language models for genomic and proteomic research. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4819–4836, 2024. 

> 18 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

[14] Khanh-Tung Tran, Dung Dao, Minh-Duong Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Barry O’Sullivan, and Hoang D Nguyen. Multi-agent collaboration mechanisms: A survey of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06322 , 2025. [15] Yuanqi Du, Botao Yu, Tianyu Liu, Tony Shen, Junwu Chen, Jan G Rittig, Kunyang Sun, Yikun Zhang, Zhangde Song, Bo Zhou, et al. Accelerating scientific discovery with autonomous goal-evolving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21782 , 2025. [16] Tianyu Liu, Tinglin Huang, Tong Ding, Hao Wu, Peter Humphrey, Sudhir Perincheri, Kurt Schalper, Rex Ying, Hua Xu, James Zou, et al. Leveraging multi-modal foundation models for analysing spatial multi-omic and histopathology data. Nature Biomedical Engineering , pages 1–18, 2026. [17] Tianyu Liu, Weihao Xuan, Hao Wu, Peter Humphrey, Marcello DiStasio, Heli Qi, Rui Yang, Simeng Han, Tinglin Huang, Fang Wu, et al. Teampath: Building multimodal pathology experts with reasoning ai copilots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17652 , 2025. [18] Xuanzhong Chen, Xiaohao Mao, Qihan Guo, Lun Wang, Shuyang Zhang, and Ting Chen. Rarebench: can llms serve as rare diseases specialists? In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 4850–4861, 2024. [19] Haichao Chen, Zhengyun Zhao, Songchi Zhou, Shikai Hu, Jinyuan Wang, Ye Jin, Xianghong Jin, Yih Chung Tham, Xiaofei Wang, Weizhi Ma, et al. Rarearena: a comprehensive benchmark dataset unveiling the potential of large language models in rare disease diagnosis. The Lancet Digital Health , 2026. [20] Hengchang Wang, Li Liu, Huaxiang Zhang, Lei Zhu, Xiaojun Chang, and Hao Du. Visual-rag: Knowledge-guided retrieval augmentation for image-text matching. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 2025. [21] Jagjit Singh Dhatterwal, Mahaveer Singh Naruka, and Kuldeep Singh Kaswan. Multi-agent sys-tem based medical diagnosis using particle swarm optimization in healthcare. In 2023 Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Smart Communication (AISC) , pages 889–893. IEEE, 2023. [22] Xi Chen, Huahui Yi, Mingke You, WeiZhi Liu, Li Wang, Hairui Li, Xue Zhang, Yingman Guo, Lei Fan, Gang Chen, et al. Enhancing diagnostic capability with multi-agents conversational large language models. NPJ digital medicine , 8(1):159, 2025. [23] Yang Liu, Honglei Li, Peng Jiang, Lizhen Wu, Zhi Xie, Chao Ning, Xiangya Kong, Yayun Wang, Xinlei Zhang, and Zechi Huang. Vc-rdagent: An efficient rare disease diagnosis agent via virtual case construction informed by hybrid statistical-metric and hyperbolic-semantic prioritization. 

bioRxiv , pages 2026–02, 2026. [24] Eliete da S Rodrigues, Sean Griffith, Renan Martin, Corina Antonescu, Jennifer E Posey, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir, Shalini N Jhangiani, Kimberly F Doheny, James R Lupski, David Valle, et al. Variant-level matching for diagnosis and discovery: Challenges and opportunities. Human mutation , 43(6):782–790, 2022. [25] Leland McInnes, John Healy, Nathaniel Saul, and Lukas Großberger. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection. Journal of Open Source Software , 3(29), 2018. 

> 19 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

[26] Rachel B Ramoni, John J Mulvihill, David R Adams, Patrick Allard, Euan A Ashley, Jonathan A Bernstein, William A Gahl, Rizwan Hamid, Joseph Loscalzo, Alexa T McCray, et al. The un-diagnosed diseases network: accelerating discovery about health and disease. The American Journal of Human Genetics , 100(2):185–192, 2017. [27] Emily Alsentzer, Michelle M Li, Shilpa N Kobren, Ayush Noori, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, Isaac S Kohane, and Marinka Zitnik. Few shot learning for phenotype-driven diagnosis of patients with rare genetic diseases. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):380, 2025. [28] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [29] Robert C Griggs, Mark Batshaw, Mary Dunkle, Rashmi Gopal-Srivastava, Edward Kaye, Jef-frey Krischer, Tan Nguyen, Kathleen Paulus, Peter A Merkel, et al. Clinical research for rare disease: opportunities, challenges, and solutions. Molecular genetics and metabolism , 96(1):20– 26, 2009. [30] N Bögershausen and B Wollnik. Unmasking kabuki syndrome. Clinical genetics , 83(3):201–211, 2013. [31] Pedro Sanchez, Jeremy P Voisey, Tian Xia, Hannah I Watson, Alison Q O’Neil, and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Causal machine learning for healthcare and precision medicine. Royal Society Open Science , 9(8):220638, 2022. [32] Kym M Boycott, Megan R Vanstone, Dennis E Bulman, and Alex E MacKenzie. Rare-disease genetics in the era of next-generation sequencing: discovery to translation. Nature Reviews Genetics , 14(10):681–691, 2013. [33] OpenAI. Gpt-5 system card. 2025. Available at: https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/. [34] Anthropic. Claude sonnet 4.5. https://www.anthropic.com/claude/sonnet , 2025. Large language model. [35] Kexin Huang, Serena Zhang, Hanchen Wang, Yuanhao Qu, Yingzhou Lu, Yusuf Roohani, Ryan Li, Lin Qiu, Gavin Li, Junze Zhang, et al. Biomni: A general-purpose biomedical ai agent. 

biorxiv , 2025. [36] Peter N Robinson and Stefan Mundlos. The human phenotype ontology. Clinical genetics ,77(6):525–534, 2010. [37] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research , 12:2825–2830, 2011. [38] Jacob White. Pubmed 2.0. Medical reference services quarterly , 39(4):382–387, 2020. [39] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. [40] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations , 2022. 

> 20 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

[41] Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. In ICLR ,2024. [42] Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 , 2022. [43] Moxin Li, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Fengbin Zhu, Qifan Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Think twice before assure: Confidence estimation for large language models through reflection on multiple answers. CoRR , 2024. [44] OpenAI. Openai o3 and o4-mini system card. https://openai.com/index/ o3-o4-mini-system-card/ , April 2025. System card. Accessed 2025-11-07. [45] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024. [46] Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, YeYanhan YeYanhan, and Zheyan Luo. Lla-mafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstra-tions) , pages 400–410, 2024. [47] Yubin Kim, Chanwoo Park, Hyewon Jeong, Yik S Chan, Xuhai Xu, Daniel McDuff, Hyeonhoon Lee, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Cynthia Breazeal, and Hae W Park. Mdagents: An adaptive collabo-ration of llms for medical decision-making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:79410–79452, 2024. [48] Jian Yang, Liqi Shu, Huilong Duan, and Haomin Li. Rdguru: An intelligent agent for rare diseases. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings , volume 2024, page 1275, 2025. [49] Xuanzhong Chen, Ye Jin, Xiaohao Mao, Lun Wang, Shuyang Zhang, and Ting Chen. Rareagents: Autonomous multi-disciplinary team for rare disease diagnosis and treatment. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12475 , 2024. 

> 21 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

A. Comparison between Hygieia and other AI agents                                                                 

> System Distinguish Human Confidence Risk Gene Flexible Input Open Source Evaluation Setting Domain
> MCA (22) ✗✗✗✗✓✓Benchmark Rare MDAgent (47) ✓✗✗✗✓✓Benchmark General DeepRare (5) ✗✗✗✗✗✓Benchmark Rare Biomni (35) ✓✗✗✓✓✓Benchmark & Human Eval General RDguru (48) ✗✗✗✗✗✗Benchmark Rare RareAgent (49) ✗✗✗✗✗✗Benchmark Rare Hygieia (Ours) ✓✓✓✓✓✓Benchmark & Human Eval Rare

Supplementary Tab. 1: Comparison of representative AI Agents for disease-related tasks across dif-ferent dimensions. Here we consider Distinguish (whether the agent can distinguish common and rare diseases), Human (whether the agent supports human-in-the-loop), Confidence (whether the agent can produce confidence), Risk Gene (whether the agent can also infer risk gene), Flexible Input (whether the agent supports input other than HPO terms), and Open Source (whether the codes are accessible). We also compare their evaluation settings as well as focused domains. In Supplementary Table 1, we showcase the unique contribution of Hygieia by comparing it with other disease diagnosis agents across multiple dimensions. 

B. Prompts 

The prompts used for disease diagnosis: “Make diagnosis for this patient. Known phenotypes include: {phenotype_list}. Multiple local hospital evaluations failed to establish a definitive diagnosis." The prompts used for gene prioritization: “Consider you are a genetic counselor. The phenotype description of the patient is {phenotype_list}. Can you suggest a list of top 1 possible genes to test?" The prompts used for error detection and correction: You are a board-certified clinical geneticist and neurologist with expertise in rare neuromuscu-lar and congenital disorders. You reason step-by-step using established diagnostic criteria, geno-type–phenotype correlations, and differential diagnosis logic. Below is a patient’s clinical phenotype and a proposed diagnosis. Your task is to determine whether the proposed diagnosis is correct. Instructions: 1. Carefully assess whether the phenotype is consistent with the proposed diagnosis. 2. If the diagnosis is correct, explicitly state that it is correct and explain why. 3. If the diagnosis is incorrect or incomplete, clearly state that it is incorrect and: - Provide the most likely corrected diag-nosis - Briefly justify the correction using key phenotype–disease matches 4. Do not provide multiple diagnoses—return one best diagnosis only. 5. Be concise, clinically precise, and avoid speculation beyond the given phenotype. Patient Phenotype: {PHENOTYPE_LIST} Proposed Diagnosis: {PROPOSED_DIAGNOSIS} Output Format (strict): Diagnosis Assessment: Correct / Incorrect Final Diagnosis: <single diagnosis name> Reasoning: - Key phenotype–diagnosis alignment (or mismatch) - Critical features supporting the 

> 22

A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 

final diagnosis 

23 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 

C. Supplementary Figures b

a

> Rep1
> Rep2

Supplementary Fig. 1: Failure cases of AI agent in disease diagnosis, by using DeepRare as an exam-ple. We mask some phenotypes to protect patient information. (a) Failure of diagnosis. (b) Failure of reproducing results. 

> 24

A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 0  

> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> heldout test Random Prompting GPT5

Accuracy comparison for classifier   

> 0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1
> heldout test RareBench Mygene2

Accuracy comparison for testing datasets 

# a

# b

# c

Supplementary Fig. 2: Classification results of router. (a) Accuracy comparisons of different classi-fication methods. (b) Accuracy comparisons of different testing sets. (c) UMAP colored by sample labels (common diseases, rare diseases, and healthy people). 

25 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 

Supplementary Fig. 3: Benchmarking results for disease diagnosis based on the RareArena dataset. 

> 26 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

p-value 

LogProbs  0.294 

Think-Twice  1

True/False Confidence  1

Voting Average  9.02E-06 

a b

Supplementary Fig. 4: Estimation of confidence levels based on Hygieia. (a) Comparison of scaled confidence scores tested with MyGene2 dataset. (b) Ablation studies for different estimation meth-ods. The p-value is computed based on two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. 

> 27

A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization 0

0.05 

0.1 

0.15 

0.2 

0.25 

0.3 

0.35 

0.4 

0.45 

0.5 

rep1  rep2  rep3 

# Testing of robustness (Recall@1) 

Supplementary Fig. 5: Examination of AI agent robustness. 

28 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization <thinking>\nWe are provided with the phenotypes: \n- Elbow flexion contracture\n- Hip contracture\n- Toe walking\n- Wrist flexion contracture\n- Flexion contracture\n- Flexion contracture of toe\n\nThese present as multiple distal and proximal joint contractures. Toe walking and plantar flexion contracture are consistent with distal arthrogryposis syndromes. The detected risk gene is TTN, encoding titin — a large sarcomeric protein that, when mutated, can cause myopathic phenotypes, including congenital myopathy and arthrogryposis-like presentations.\n\nLooking at the provided references: \n- "Distal arthrogryposis type 10" from NCBI: characterized by plantar flexion contractures, toe-walking, in infancy, consistent with given phenotypes. \n- Distal arthrogryposis syndromes: contractures of two or more different body areas, frequently involving elbows, wrists, hips, toes (flexion contracture). \n- TTN mutations have been linked to some congenital myopathy forms with early contractures, but among distal arthrogryposis types, DA type 10 is specifically described as caused by TTN mutations (newly classified). \n\nGiven that this presentation involves elbow, hip, wrist contractures and toe walking — and the genetic data points to TTN — the most relevant diagnosis aligning with OMIM/Orphanet/CCRD naming conventions is "Distal arthrogryposis type 10."\n\nOther possibilities (amyoplasia, congenital contractural arachnodactyly, Baller–Gerold syndrome) don’t fit as well because:\n- Amyoplasia involves four-limb contractures but is linked to unknown etiology, not TTN.\n- Congenital contractural arachnodactyly is linked to FBN2, and phenotypic features like marfanoid habitus, which are not mentioned here.\n- Baller–Gerold syndrome shows radial defects and craniosynostosis, absent here.\n\nThus, TTN mutation + plantar flexion contractures + toe walking + multi-joint involvement → Distal 

arthrogryposis type 10 is the top diagnosis.\n</thinking> 

<solution>\nDistal arthrogryposis type 10\n</solution> 

Disease diagnosis 

b

<thinking> \nLet's carefully analyze the phenotype list and the context. \n\n**Phenotypes provided:** \n- Delayed speech and language development \n- Wide n asal bridge, enlarged naris, short columella, long philtrum, micrognathia, pursed lips, dimple chin, full cheeks \n- Seizures \n- Hypotonia \n- Breathing dysregulatio n, respiratory insufficiency, central apnea, abnormal respiration pattern \n- Cerebral atrophy \n- Multiple contractures (camptodactyly, adducted thumb, hip contrac ture, elbow flexion contracture) \n- Foot deformities (talipes equinovarus, calcaneovalgus deformity) \n- Gastrointestinal issues (gastroesophageal reflux, constipati on, inguinal hernia) \n- Orthopedic issues (scoliosis) \n- Eye involvement (esotropia, strabismus) \n- Neurological signs (global developmental delay, motor delay) \ n- Nephrolithiasis \n\nThis combination strongly suggests a congenital, multisystem neurodevelopmental disorder with facial dysmorphism, hypotonia, autonomic b reathing problems, and contractures. \n\nFrom the context links: \n- CLIFAHDD syndrome (Congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia, developmental 

delay) → known to be caused by **NALCN** mutations. \n- The MyGene2 match report for **NALCN** shows overlapping findings: delayed speech, hypotonia, faci al dysmorphism, breathing abnormalities, seizures, contractures. \n- SETD2 and SETBP1 disorders involve some overlapping features, but they lack the characteristic combination of facial contractures, breathing dysregulation, and gross hypotonia seen here. \n\nGiven the constellation of symptoms and research hints, **NALCN* * is the top candidate gene. \nThis gene encodes a sodium leak channel important for neuronal excitability, and pathogenic variants cause CLIFAHDD syndrome with the exact features listed. \n</thinking> 

<solution> \nNALCN \n</solution 

a

Gene prioritization 

Supplementary Fig. 6: Full reasoning paths in two tasks by Hygieia. (a) is for disease diagnosis and (b) is for risk gene prioritization. 

29 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization Thinking: Based on my comprehensive analysis, I have:\n\n1. Systematically categorized all patient phenotypes into organ systems\n2. Used the AI diagnosis function which returned the top 5 diseases\ n3. Verified findings through database queries (Monarch Initiative) \n4. Validated with 

literature search (PubMed) \n5. Performed detailed phenotype-disease matching analysis\n\nThe analysis strongly supports Kabuki syndrome as the primary diagnosis, with the distinctive facial features being particularly pathognomonic. The combination of:\n- Characteristic facial 

dysmorphisms… I also search related genes, they include … 

Answer: Top 5 Most Likely Diseases:1. Kabuki syndrome (KMT2D-related) 2. Kabuki syndrome (KDM6A-related ) 3. Mowat-Wilson syndrome 4. Cat Eye syndrome 5. CHARGE syndrome 

Question: Make diagnosis for this patient. The phenotypes include: postnatal growth retardation, 

microcephaly, trapezoid philtrum, large prominent ears, recurrent otitis media in infancy… Multiple 

local hospital evaluations failed to establish a definitive diagnosis. You should return the reasoning process with format <thinking></thinking> and return the top one diseases with format <answer></answer>. 

Annotated answer: Kabuki Syndrome 

Supplementary Fig. 7: Questions and answers from Hygieia based on a difficult selected sample from our in-house data. 

> 30 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

GPT5-search (OpenAI API)  Hygieia (Azure) 

# MyGene2 cost ($) 

Supplementary Fig. 8: Cost analysis between GPT-5 Search and Hygieia in risk gene prioritization based on MyGene2. 

> 31 A Versatile AI Agent for Rare Disease Diagnosis and Risk Gene Prioritization

0

0.05 

0.1 

0.15 

0.2 

0.25 

0.3 

0.35 

0.4 

0.45 

0.5 

> GPT-4o
> GPT-4o+conte xt +disease
> GPT-4o+context+disease
> GPT-5
> GPT-5 +context

## Ablation studies (gene prioritization) 

# ab

0

0.05 

0.1 

0.15 

0.2 

0.25 

0.3 

0.35 

0.4 

0.45 

0.5 

> GPT-4o GPT-5 GPT-5 +context
> GPT -5+gene+context
> GPT-5 +gene+context+verifier

## Ablation studies (disease diagnosis) 

Supplementary Fig. 9: Ablation studies of Hygieia. (a) represents the results for disease diagnosis and (b) represents the results for risk gene prioritization.