Title: VISTA Architect: A graph database-oriented health AI system demonstrated in multidisciplinary tumor boards

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22692v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:57:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# VISTA Architect: A graph database-oriented health AI system demonstrated in multidisciplinary tumor boards 

Tuomo Kiiskinen 1, ŌłŚ, Jason Fries 1, Philip Adamson 1, David Wu 2, Timothy John Ellis-Caleo 2, Aaron Fanous 1,Balasubramanian Narasimhan 1, Joel Neal 2, Sylvia Plevritis 1, Manuel A. Rivas 1, ŌłŚ   

> 1Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of Medicine 2Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine
> ŌłŚCorresponding authors: tuomoki@stanford.edu ,mrivas@stanford.edu

Abstract 

We introduce VISTA Architect , a database-oriented AI architecture for integrating large language models (LLMs) with longitudinal electronic health records (EHRs). At ingestion, it transforms complex clinical documentation into a persistent, provenance-linked knowledge graph, eliminating repeated reprocessing of raw records at query time. The architecture has two layers: a source-faithful MEDS Graph preserving granular EHR structure with full provenance, and a clinically abstracted Timeline Object Architecture (TOA) that uses graph-guided LLM extraction to synthesize a concise timeline of deduplicated, temporally coherent clinical events. This addresses key limitations of direct long-context prompting and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), which often miss temporal relationships and incur high cost and latency from repeated raw-text processing. By precomputing clinical synthesis once, downstream queries access an organized patient state and traverse to source documentation only when detailed verification is needed. We demonstrate the system in multidisciplinary thoracic oncology tumor boards at Stanford Medicine, where precise reconstruction of patient histories is critical. Across 1,180 patients, VISTA Architect achieved 96.4% accuracy (mean 9.75/10) on 15 tumor boardŌĆōsalient variables (17,700 evaluations; 95% CI 96.1ŌĆō 96.7%), surpassing a matched BM25 RAG baseline and recent benchmarks for LLM-based clinical extraction. An agentic interface reduced preparation for a 30-patient held-out cohort to about 2.2 minutes without sacrificing accuracy. While configured here for thoracic oncology, the modular design adapts to other specialties through customizable event definitions, episode structures, and agentic tools; validation beyond thoracic oncology remains future work. 

## 1 Introduction 

Clinicians routinely rely on electronic health records (EHR) to reconstruct complex patient narratives that guide critical clinical decisions. However, EHR data are primarily organized for documentation rather than for clinical reasoning, fragmenting patient tra-jectories across isolated records such as progress notes, laboratory results, and imaging reports.[ 1]The burden of manually integrating these frag-mented data into coherent clinical narratives falls heavily on clinicians, who often spend considerable timeŌĆöup to 4 hours dailyŌĆöon chart review alone,[ 2 ]exacerbating burnout and increasing the risk of cog-nitive errors.[1, 3] Multidisciplinary tumor boards exemplify these challenges.[ 4 , 5, 6 ] These real-time care conferences require rapid and precise synthesis of complex longitudinal patient trajectoriesŌĆöfrom initial diag-nosis through treatments, responses, and disease progressionŌĆöto inform critical medical decision-making without direct patient interaction. Thoracic oncology tumor boards, for example, rely heavily on accurate temporal narratives, including distinctions between baseline disease, treatment effects, emerg-ing resistance mutations, and toxicity-related com-plications. Currently, preparing a single patient case for tumor board discussion demands approximately 15ŌĆō30 minutes per clinician and suffers from signifi-cant inter-observer variability, potentially impacting 1

> arXiv:2606.22692v1 [cs.AI] 21 Jun 2026

the consistency and quality of clinical decisions.[ 4, 5 ]Traditional computational approaches attempting to address this challenge face a fundamental tension between the scale of longitudinal patient records and the capacity of current AI methods. For indi-vidual clinical documents, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong summarization capabilities, in some cases matching or exceeding medical experts.[ 7 , 8] However, tumor board prepa-ration requires synthesis over longitudinal documen-tation that may span years of care, thousands of clinical events, and very large text volumes. This scale often exceeds the practical context available to current LLM workflows, particularly when the same patient record must be queried repeatedly across multiple clinical questions. When applied to such longitudinal records, LLM performance de-grades: temporal reasoning deteriorates as input length increases,[ 9 ] and hallucinations and omis-sions become clinically consequential.[ 10 ] Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) offers a strategy for navigating records beyond context length,[ 11 ] but retrieves fragments by semantic similarity rather than temporal or clinical structure, producing dis-connected context that may miss critical longitu-dinal relationships. Dense retrieval models fre-quently underperform simple lexical baselines in specialized domains,[ 12 ] and even optimized clini-cal RAG pipelines require substantially more com-putation per query while achieving suboptimal ac-curacy relative to structured approaches.[ 13 ] Em-pirically, reported accuracy levels for LLM-based clinical information extraction reflect these limita-tions: a recent meta-analysis of 56 oncology studies reported an average overall accuracy of 76.2% (di-agnostic accuracy 67.4%),[ 14 ] agentic multi-agent orchestration achieved 84% strict recall on tumor boardŌĆōsalient facts across 71 patients,[ 15 ] and opti-mized clinical RAG pipelines for note-level extrac-tion reported F1 scores of 0.79ŌĆō0.90 depending on retrieval strategy.[ 13 ] These results were typically ob-tained on note-level or short-document tasks; whole-record longitudinal extraction is harder still. Rela-tional databases can support deterministic queries and provenance, but reconstructing a patient-level clinical state from normalized EHR tables remains a domain-specific synthesis problem: events must be temporally aligned, repeated documentation must be reconciled, and clinically meaningful phases must be inferred. VISTA Architect addresses this by mak-ing longitudinal synthesis explicit and amortized at ingestion rather than re-derived for each down-stream application.[16] Here we introduce VISTA Architect , a database-oriented AI system that addresses a general chal-lenge in applying LLMs to large document reposito-ries: how to provide accurate, structured, and com-plete context from records that far exceed model ca-pacity, without sacrificing retrieval speed or tempo-ral fidelity.[ 17 ] Our approach employs a two-tiered graph architecture that pre-computes a structured representation of the available longitudinal clinical record. The first tier, a hierarchical MEDS Graph ,preserves the granular documentation structure of the source data. The second tier, a clinically fo-cused Timeline Object Architecture (TOA), synthesizes these into deduplicated, temporally ordered events and episodesŌĆöproducing a queryable knowledge graph that any downstream application can traverse deterministically. Because the clinically organized graph is constructed once and queried repeatedly, the expensive part of the workflowŌĆölongitudinal synthesis into events, episodes, and current-state artifactsŌĆöis amortized. At query time, applications operate over this precomputed clinical context and traverse provenance links only when targeted source evidence is needed, rather than repeatedly search-ing or rereading the raw record. The contribution is therefore not that a graph store categorically re-places SQL, but that VISTA encodes a clinically meaningful, provenance-linked hierarchical tree-like compression of the longitudinal record, allowing downstream agents to navigate from patient state to targeted source evidence rather than reconstruct-ing clinical context from raw records at query time. On top of this persistent graph layer, every inter-action with VISTA ArchitectŌĆöpatient build, dash-board population, chat, and cross-patient retrievalŌĆö is served by an agentic interface in which the re-ceiving component plans its own graph traversals and parallel sub-agent invocations, supporting both on-demand cohort preparation and conversational 2clinical reasoning from a single shared graph. We demonstrate this architecture in the context of elec-tronic health records (EHR) and multidisciplinary tumor boards, where the demands on accuracy, tem-poral precision, and speed are particularly acute. At our own institution, a manual LLM-based pre-tumor-board summarization workflow has been de-veloped, evaluated against physician-authored ref-erences, and deployed into routine thoracic tumor board practice.[ 18 ] VISTA Architect builds on this operational foundation: it pre-computes a complete structured patient timeline, from which the same clinician-facing summary of critical information is re-trieved automatically rather than summarized from a fixed window of recent notes for each query. We validate the VISTA Architect system in the highly demanding context of thoracic oncology tu-mor boards at Stanford Medicine. Across the full cohort of 1,180 patients, VISTA Architect achieved 96.4% accuracy (mean score 9.75/10; 95% CI 96.1ŌĆō 96.7%) on 15 tumor boardŌĆōsalient clinical variables, with 17,063 of 17,700 variable evaluations rated as Correct. Automated case preparation completed in 2.2 minutes for a held-out 30-patient cohort un-der the fully agentic build, matching and extend-ing recent efforts exploring agentic LLM orches-tration for patient summarization in tumor-board workflows.[15] Through its structured yet flexible design, VISTA Architect offers a model for connecting large doc-ument repositories to LLM-powered applications. The architecture is adaptable via specialty-specific configurationsŌĆödefining context-appropriate node types, episode structures, and variable dictionariesŌĆö making it applicable beyond thoracic oncology to other clinical specialties and, more broadly, to any domain where large, longitudinal document collec-tions must be queried with high accuracy and com-plete provenance. 

## 2 Results 

2.1 Architecture 

We designed VISTA Architect using a database-oriented AI framework, diverging from text-processing methodologies such as direct LLM prompting, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) over raw EHR text, and programmatic determinis-tic queries over relational EHR schemas, by posi-tioning graph databases at the core of clinical data representation.[ 17 ] The architecture is organized into three interconnected layers: (1) a structured multi-layered graph database derived directly from elec-tronic health record (EHR) data; (2) an AI bridge that manages complex query translation and data retrieval; and (3) a generative and agentic user in-terface that dynamically generates display items di-rectly from the TOA data layer. The graph database is constructed in three sequential steps during patient ingestion, each producing a graph-resident layer that downstream applications can query deterministically. The two subsections that follow describe how these layers are assembled into the runtime context for an agentic AI bridge, and how that bridge is exposed through the user-facing applications. 

2.1.1 Step 1: Turning the EHR into a graph database 

First, VISTA Architect transforms the source health record into a persistent graph database. In the im-plementation evaluated here, the source data were represented as MEDS XML, a hierarchical representa-tion derived from the Medical Event Data Standard (MEDS).[ 19 ] However, the architecture does not de-pend on MEDS XML specifically. The same graph layer can be constructed from other structured, semi-structured, or document-based clinical sources, pro-vided that the source data can be represented as nodes, edges, timestamps, and provenance links. This first graph layer, the MEDS Graph, represents the EHR as a graph. It preserves the granular structure of the source record: patients, encoun-ters, notes, measurements, procedures, medications, imaging records, and other clinical entries become graph nodes, while temporal, visit-level, and source-document relationships become graph edges. The goal of this layer is not to summarize the record, but to make the original EHR computationally address-3Figure 1: VISTA Architect high-level system design. VISTA Architect converts source EHR data into a persistent graph database, consisting of a source-faithful MEDS Graph and a clinically abstracted TOA Graph. The agentic AI bridge operates over TOA events, episodes, current-state artifacts, and targeted MEDS Graph retrieval through tool calls. The user interface exposes the same graph-resident artifacts through display items, natural-language interaction, and provenance-linked EHR access. 

able. This step is deterministic and does not require an LLM. Because the MEDS Graph maintains links back to the original source documents, later AI-generated assertions can be traced to the underlying EHR ev-idence. The graph can also link to multimodal as-sets such as imaging studies, audio recordings, and waveform data without storing them directly, keep-ing the graph lightweight to operate. The graph database therefore becomes the primary data struc-ture of the system: the LLM is not asked to re-peatedly reread the full record from scratch, but instead operates over a structured representation of the record. In our thoracic oncology cohort, per-patient MEDS Graphs contained a median of 3,608 nodes (IQR 562ŌĆō11,629; the full MEDS Graph schema is given in Appendix C). 

2.1.2 Step 2: Timeline Object Architecture (TOA) 

Next, VISTA Architect constructs a compact clini-cal timeline graph on top of the source-level graph. We refer to this layer as the Timeline Object Archi-tecture (TOA) Graph. Whereas the MEDS Graph represents the EHR as documented, the TOA Graph represents the patient trajectory as a coherent time-line of clinically meaningful events; both graph lay-ers are shown for a single representative patient in Supplementary Fig. S6. The central operation in this step is transforming EHR data from documents into clinical events. For example, a diagnosis, surgery, imaging result, molec-4ular test, treatment start, adverse event, or change in clinical status may be mentioned across multiple notes. In the TOA layer, these mentions are resolved into a single event object linked back to the source evidence in the MEDS Graph. This converts the longitudinal record from a documentation-centered graph into a decision-centered clinical timeline. This step uses graph-guided LLM extraction. Rather than prompting an LLM with an entire raw EHR, the system traverses the MEDS Graph, splits the EHR into compact graph-derived segments, presents those segments to the model, and asks it to produce standardized, structured clinical event objects. The LLM therefore performs a bounded abstraction task over graph-derived context, while the graph pre-serves provenance and temporal structure. A key distinction is that timestamps in the TOA Graph rep-resent the inferred time of the actual clinical occur-rence, whereas timestamps in the source EHR typi-cally reflect when that information was documented. In some cases these dates are effectively identical; in others, the difference may span months, years, or even decades when historical events are recorded retrospectively. The TOA Graph therefore represents the patientŌĆÖs actual biomedical and clinical course rather than the order in which facts happened to appear in notes. The event-extraction and episode-synthesis prompts used in the thoracic oncology con-figuration are reproduced in Appendices E.1 and E.2. 

2.1.3 Step 3: Forming episodes and current-state artifacts 

Finally, the TOA graph is expanded by generating higher-order clinical structures from the timeline ob-ject event stream. Individual TOA events provide a detailed timeline, but episode formation compresses that stream into a compact clinical story: meaning-ful phases with clear transitions, anchors, and rea-sons for change. In the thoracic oncology configu-ration, these episodes include baseline history, diag-nostic workup, treatment lines, and post-oncological phases, but the episode vocabulary is configurable for other domains. Episode formation serves two purposes. First, it makes complex longitudinal records easier for hu-mans to understand by organizing long sequences of events into clinically meaningful phases. Second, it is itself a precomputed reasoning step that aids later AI operations over the graph. By storing phase boundaries, transition points, treatment contexts, and termination reasons, the system gives down-stream agents a structured map of the timeline rather than only a flat sequence of events. Later graph oper-ations can therefore start from a clinically organized representation and traverse into finer-grained evi-dence only when needed. The same ingestion process also produces current-state graph-resident artifacts, such as structured vari-able snapshots, summaries, and display-ready fields. These artifacts represent the systemŌĆÖs latest synthe-sized view of the patient at the relevant decision point. They are not merely UI elements; they are stored outputs of prior reasoning over the graph. Dashboards, agents, documentation tools, cohort queries, and cross-patient retrieval can reuse these artifacts without reconstructing the clinical context from the raw EHR for every interaction. 

2.1.4 Connecting the graph to an agentic AI bridge 

At runtime, the AI bridge operates with the TOA layer, episode structure, current-state artifacts, and a small recent EHR context available to the model. This gives the agent a compact but clinically orga-nized view of the patient before any additional re-trieval is needed. User or application requests can therefore often be answered directly from the graph-resident clinical representation. When additional detail is required, the agent uses the TOA layer to navigate the lower-level MEDS Graph and retrieve targeted pieces of the original EHR. For example, the TOA Graph may identify the relevant clinical event or episode, after which the agent can traverse provenance edges to recover the exact source note, imaging report, laboratory value, or document fragment. Retrieval is therefore guided by the clinical abstraction layer rather than performed as an unguided search over raw text. In this sense, graph traversal is used as a clinical navi-5gation operation: the agent starts from TOA events, episodes, or current-state artifacts and follows clini-cally meaningful edges to the relevant source-level nodes, rather than issuing a broad search over the full patient record. This design changes the role of retrieval. Conven-tional RAG systems retrieve fragments from raw documents at query time. VISTA Architect instead performs much of the semantic and temporal or-ganization once, stores it as graph structure, and then uses that structure to retrieve only the targeted source evidence needed for a given task. The AI bridge uses natural language, tool calls, and agentic orchestration, but the durable context remains the graph: TOA for clinical navigation, MEDS Graph for source-level detail, and original EHR documents for auditability. 

2.1.5 Exposing the architecture through user-facing applications 

The final step is the user-facing application layer. Users see many of the same display artifacts that the AI bridge holds in context: structured patient fields, timeline summaries, episode-level views, and current-state summaries. This makes the interface and the AI bridge operate over the same underly-ing representation rather than over separate data products. In the thoracic oncology configuration, this layer exposes Overview, Clinical Timeline, au-tomated tumor board note, and chat views, all ren-dered from graph-resident artifacts (Supplementary Figs. S2, S3, S4, and S5). From the user perspective, this enables both direct review and interactive extension. A user can inspect display items, ask questions about them through the AI bridge, and, when needed, the agent can per-form additional graph operations. These operations can be purely retrieval-oriented, such as finding the source evidence for a clinical assertion, or generative, such as drafting a note, producing a summary, creat-ing a plot, or assembling a domain-specific view. Here we demonstrate VISTA Architect in multidis-ciplinary thoracic tumor boards. The tumor-board application is a configuration of the system, not the boundary of the architecture. The architecture can be adapted to other clinical domains through con-figurable event types, episode structures, display artifacts, edge types, and agentic tool capabilities. What is shared is the architectural core: construct a source-faithful EHR graph, abstract it into a clinically meaningful TOA graph, store reusable reasoning ar-tifacts, and expose the result through an agentic AI bridge and user interface. 

2.2 Application to Thoracic Tumor Boards 

2.2.1 Clinical Context 

Multidisciplinary tumor boards require clinicians to rapidly synthesize comprehensive patient histo-ries from fragmented and complex electronic health record (EHR) data.[ 4, 5, 6] These real-time care con-ferences integrate expertise from radiologists, pathol-ogists, medical oncologists, surgeons, and geneticists to develop precise, patient-specific treatment strate-gies. Accurate and temporally precise reconstruction of clinical eventsŌĆöincluding diagnostic evaluations, therapeutic interventions, molecular testing, and tox-icity managementŌĆöis essential to informed clinical decision-making in oncology, particularly in thoracic malignancies where patients frequently experience multiple treatment stages and complex care trajecto-ries. 

2.2.2 Implementation Details 

We implemented VISTA Architect specifically within thoracic oncology tumor boards, leveraging its flex-ible architecture through configurable profiles and specialized prompts. These profiles define how the MEDS Graph and Timeline Object Architecture (TOA) layers process and structure clinical data specifically for thoracic oncology decision-making. For thoracic oncology tumor boards, the profile con-figuration involved defining clinically meaningful episodes and events tailored explicitly for oncol-ogy scenarios. Episodes included baseline assess-ments, diagnostic evaluations, distinct numbered treatment lines, and post-treatment surveillance. Imaging events such as CT, MRI, and PET scans 6Figure 2: Synthetic example of TOA-based timeline organization. VISTA Architect maps source-level imaging events from the EHR into graph-resident clinical episodes. The central timeline shows how granular events contribute to higher-order episode summaries, preserving temporal structure and provenance while creating a compact representation for display, agentic retrieval, and source-evidence navigation. 

served as anchors for defining these episodes, with events grouped around these anchors within clini-cally meaningful temporal windows ( ┬▒90 days over-all, ┬▒7 days for co-occurrence). Additionally, we established a focused variable dic-tionary capturing the most clinically relevant pa-tient information frequently discussed during tumor board meetings. These variables included demo-graphic details (date of birth, sex, smoking status), tumor-specific factors (diagnosis, histology, metas-tasis, lymph node involvement, and genetic testing panel), treatment information (previous surgeries, current medical therapy, radiation therapy, last imag-ing dates), clinical status (ECOG performance status, therapy toxicity/comorbidities), and safety-critical details (allergies). The full dictionary, with variable types, is provided in Supplementary Table S2. The variable dictionary and the pre-tumor-board summary note were not defined de novo: they fol-low the tumor-boardŌĆōsalient fields and the concise summary format already in operational use at the Stanford thoracic tumor board.[ 18 ] VISTA Architect produces these same artifacts from the precomputed graph at ingestion, rather than re-deriving them from per-query note retrieval. 

2.3 Clinical Accuracy 

The 1,180 patients in this study were those in the Data Lake who presented at thoracic multidisci-plinary tumor boards between (de-identified) Jan-uary 2020 and November 2025 (Table 1). The co-hort was predominantly NSCLC (82.0%), with repre-sentation of thymoma/thymic tumors (8.0%), SCLC (2.9%), mesothelioma (2.9%), and other thoracic ma-lignancies (4.2%). Molecular profiling results were documented in 67.3% of patient records, with EGFR (17.8%), KRAS (8.2%), and ALK (4.1%) the most prevalent actionable drivers across the full cohort. Each patient contributed an EHR data export, con-verted to MEDS XML (Section 2.1), with a median record time span of 8.5 years (IQR 4.4ŌĆō12.7), a me-dian of 3,255 clinical events (IQR 362ŌĆō10,922), and a median of 3,608 MEDS Graph nodes (IQR 562ŌĆō 11,629), encompassing demographics, oncologic pro-cedures, and longitudinal clinical text. From each pa-tient, we extracted 15 multidisciplinary tumor board (MTB)-salient variables spanning demographics, tu-7mor characteristics, treatment history, clinical status, imaging, and safety (Table 3), yielding 17,700 total variable evaluations. We evaluated VISTA Architect across the full 1,180-patient thoracic oncology cohort using 15 tumor boardŌĆōsalient variables per patient (17,700 total eval-uations). Ground truth was established from raw EHR XML truncated at the documented tumor board date, ensuring evaluation reflects only information available at the clinical decision point. The produc-tion pipeline used GPT-4.1 for chunk-level event extraction and GPT-5 for downstream patient-info synthesis; an independent GPT-5 LLM-as-judge (Ap-pendix E.5) scored each extracted variable against the ground truth, with full evaluation protocol and clinician validation described in Methods. Overall accuracy was high, achieving an ap-proximate mean quality score of 9.75/10 with 

17,063/17,700 (96.4%; 95% CI 96.1ŌĆō96.7%) variables rated as Correct (Table 2). 1 As a sensitivity analysis addressing the concern that two of the 15 reported variables (Date of Birth and Sex) are reliably avail-able from structured OMOP fields and serve here as positive controls for upstream hallucination (Sec-tion 4.2), the same headline excluding those two positive controls is 9.71/10 mean (95.85% correct; 14,703/15,340 evaluations across 13 variables, Wil-son 95% CI 95.52ŌĆō96.15%). Performance was consistent across all six clinical categories (Table 3). Demographics achieved the highest accuracy: Date of Birth and Sex were both extracted perfectly (10.00/10, 100% correct across all 1,180 patients; 95% CI 99.7ŌĆō100%). Safety- and treatment-related variables were extracted with high reliability, including Radiation Therapy at 9.94/10 (99.1%; 95% CI 98.3ŌĆō99.5%) and Allergies at 9.70/10 (94.8%; 95% CI 93.4ŌĆō96.0%). Tumor characterization variables were reliably extracted, with Histology at 9.89/10 (97.8%), Genetic Testing Panel at 9.75/10 (95.4%), and both Metastasis and Lymph Node In-volvement at 9.68ŌĆō9.69/10 (94.8ŌĆō95.0%). The most 

> 1DNR / code status, evaluated in the original 16-variable schema and excluded from the primary endpoint because it is deterministically available from OMOP-coded fields, was ex-tracted at mean 9.92/10 and 99.5% correct (1,174/1,180; Wilson 95% CI 98.9ŌĆō99.8%).

challenging variable was Date of Last CT (9.52/10, 92.1%; 95% CI 90.4ŌĆō93.5%), reflecting ambiguity be-tween internal and external imaging dates. Independent clinician validation of the LLM-as-judge was performed on a randomly selected 30-patient subset from the full 1,180-patient cohort. The original clinician review covered 480 paired evalu-ations from the initial 16-variable set; the primary endpoint reported here excludes DNR/code status, yielding 450 endpoint evaluations in the same 30 patients. The subset was subsequently checked to ensure that it was representative of the broader co-hort rather than an outlier sample. Clinician review classified each of the 480 paired judge decisions as Agree, Uncertain, or Disagree: 95.4% were rated Agree (95% CI 93.2ŌĆō97.0%), 4.6% Uncertain, and 0% Disagree (zero of 480; 95% CI upper bound 0.79%). The Uncertain cases clustered on variables with in-herent clinical ambiguity. The judge correctly identi-fied all six VISTA extraction failures in the sample (100% sensitivity), grading each as Partial or Incor-rect. On the same 30-patient cohort, we additionally evaluated the fully agentic extraction pipeline (Sec-tion 2.1.4), in which chunk-level extraction is paral-lelized within and across patients and coordinated by an agent. This agentic build also used a dif-ferent underlying model family from the sequen-tial pipelineŌĆöClaude Opus 4.6 as orchestrator, with Gemini 3.5 Flash for per-chunk event extraction and episode synthesis (Appendix H)ŌĆöso the agreement reported here additionally indicates that extraction quality is not tied to a single model provider. Extrac-tion accuracy remained consistent with the sequen-tial pipeline reported above: the GPT-5 judge scored the two pipelines within confidence-interval overlap on the 16-variable rubric, with no systematic per-variable regression. The wall-time gains achieved under this configuration are reported in Section 2.5. Error analysis across the 637 incorrect extractions (3.6%) revealed systematic patterns rather than ran-dom failures. The most common error source was imaging chronology (Date of Last CT), arising from ambiguity between internal and external imaging dates or PET-CT versus standalone CT attribution. 8Table 1: Cohort characteristics (N=1,180), summarized from VISTA-generated structured artifacts. Values combine source-structured fields and text-derived artifacts produced during pipeline processing; this descriptive table is not intended as a standalone benchmark of LLM extraction from unstructured text. Per-gene rows report positive results; patients with multiple actionable drivers are counted in more than one row, so the per-gene counts sum to more than the 613 patients with any actionable driver. 

Characteristic Value Patient Demographics 

Age at tumor board, median (IQR), y 69 (61ŌĆō76) Male 547 (46.4%) Female 633 (53.6%) 

Clinical Characteristics 

Smoking status Current / Former / Never 74 / 470 / 575 Unknown 61 (5.2%) Pack-years, median (IQR) 30 (12ŌĆō45) ECOG performance status 0 / 1 / 2 / 3ŌĆō4 254 / 379 / 76 / 29 Unknown 343 (29.1%) 

Tumor Characteristics 

Primary diagnosis NSCLC 968 (82.0%) Thymoma/thymic tumors 94 (8.0%) SCLC 34 (2.9%) Mesothelioma 34 (2.9%) Other thoracic malignancies 50 (4.2%) Metastatic disease Yes / No 523 / 500 Unknown or suspected 157 (13.3%) Lymph node involvement Yes / No 572 / 437 Unknown or suspected 171 (14.5%) 

Molecular Testing 

Results documented 794 (67.3%) Any actionable driver mutation 613 (51.9%) EGFR / KRAS / ALK 210 / 97 / 48 MET / HER2 / BRAF 35 / 29 / 26 ROS1 / RET / NTRK 19 / 19 / 5 PD-L1 results documented 671 (56.9%) 

Treatment History 

Current systemic anticancer therapy 385 (32.6%) History of radiation therapy 389 (33.0%) 

Safety 

Known drug allergies 545 (46.2%) 

Previous Surgery errors stemmed from boundary cases in surgical procedure classification (e.g., diag-nostic VATS biopsy vs. oncologic resection). Aller-gies and Current Medical Therapy errors reflected documentation fragmentation across the longitudi-nal record. Metastasis errors arose from ambiguous staging scenarios where imaging was ŌĆ£suspicious but not confirmed.ŌĆØ No errors occurred in Date of Birth or Sex across all 1,180 patients. Worked exam-ples of a perfect extraction and of a representative 9Metric Value 

Patients evaluated 1,180 Variables per patient 15 Total evaluations 17,700 Mean quality score 9.75/10 

Correct 17,063/17,700 (96.4%; 95% CI 96.1ŌĆō96.7%) 

Incorrect 637/17,700 (3.6%) 

Table 2: Aggregate extraction accuracy across 15 MTB-salient variables for 1,180 patients after excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint. 

Variable Category Mean Score 95% CI % Correct 95% CI 

Date of Birth Demographics 10.00 (10.00ŌĆō10.00) 100.0% (99.7ŌĆō100.0%) Sex Demographics 10.00 (10.00ŌĆō10.00) 100.0% (99.7ŌĆō100.0%) Smoking Status Demographics 9.80 (9.75ŌĆō9.84) 97.8% (96.8ŌĆō98.5%) Diagnosis Tumor 9.72 (9.68ŌĆō9.77) 95.3% (94.0ŌĆō96.4%) Histology Tumor 9.89 (9.86ŌĆō9.93) 97.8% (96.8ŌĆō98.5%) Metastasis Tumor 9.68 (9.62ŌĆō9.74) 95.0% (93.6ŌĆō96.1%) Lymph Node Involvement Tumor 9.69 (9.63ŌĆō9.75) 94.8% (93.4ŌĆō96.0%) Genetic Testing Panel Tumor 9.75 (9.69ŌĆō9.80) 95.4% (94.1ŌĆō96.5%) ECOG Performance Status Clinical 9.69 (9.64ŌĆō9.73) 98.1% (97.2ŌĆō98.8%) Therapy Toxicity / Comorbidities Clinical 9.58 (9.54ŌĆō9.62) 95.0% (93.6ŌĆō96.1%) Previous Surgery Treatment 9.53 (9.44ŌĆō9.63) 95.2% (93.8ŌĆō96.3%) Current Medical Therapy Treatment 9.72 (9.66ŌĆō9.79) 95.5% (94.2ŌĆō96.5%) Radiation Therapy Treatment 9.94 (9.91ŌĆō9.96) 99.1% (98.3ŌĆō99.5%) Date of Last CT Imaging 9.52 (9.43ŌĆō9.62) 92.1% (90.4ŌĆō93.5%) Allergies Safety 9.70 (9.63ŌĆō9.77) 94.8% (93.4ŌĆō96.0%) 

Overall All 9.75 ŌĆō 96.4% (96.1ŌĆō96.7%) 

Table 3: Per-variable extraction accuracy with 95% confidence intervals after excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint (N=1,180 patients, 17,700 evaluations). Mean scores on 0ŌĆō10 scale. CIs for mean scores via normal approximation; CIs for % correct via Wilson score interval. 

imaging-chronology failure mode are provided in Supplementary Tables S3 and S4. 

2.4 Comparison with RAG Baseline 

Additionally, we performed the same retrieval task using a standard BM25 retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) baseline on the randomly selected, rep-resentative 30-patient subset (450 total evaluations after excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint), using the same LLM-as-judge protocol and identical ground truth (Appendix G). The RAG baseline employed BM25 retrieval over raw EHR XML entry-level chunks with focused, per-variable queries (Appendix G.5)ŌĆöthe configuration most fa-vorable to lexical retrievalŌĆöand used the same gen-eration models (GPT-4.1 and GPT-5) as VISTA Ar-chitect. No graph structure, event extraction, or pre-computed artifacts were provided to the RAG sys-tem. After excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint, VISTA Architect achieved 96.9% accuracy (mean 9.76/10) on this subset, consistent with the full-cohort result. The RAG baselines achieved 66.7ŌĆō 66.9% accuracy (mean approximately 7.58ŌĆō7.73/10), a roughly 30 percentage-point gap in strict correct-ness (Table 4; full per-variable breakdown in Supple-10 mentary Table S5). VISTA outperformed RAG on ev-ery one of the 30 patients (all paired deltas positive). The paired superiority is statistically significant by both an exact sign test (30/30 patients, two-sided 

p = 1.86 ├Ś 10 ŌłÆ9) and a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (one-sided, VISTA > RAG: W = 465, p = 8.6 ├Ś 10 ŌłÆ7

against GPT-5 RAG; p = 8.7 ├Ś 10 ŌłÆ7 against GPT-4.1 RAG); mean per-patient Ōłå score (VISTA ŌłÆ RAG) was 

+2.06 for GPT-5 RAG and +2.21 for GPT-4.1 RAG. The RAG baseline performed comparably to VISTA on single-fact, lexically accessible variables (Sex, Smoking Status, Histology) and dropped sharply on variables whose values depend on temporal reso-lution of multiple mentions across the longitudinal recordŌĆöPrevious Surgery (36.7% vs. 96.7%), Metas-tasis (50.0ŌĆō53.3% vs. 96.7%), and Radiation Therapy (33.3ŌĆō73.3% vs. 100%). In contrast, this pattern of un-derperformance on time-varying variables was not observed for VISTA Architect, which scored Ōēź96.7% on all three. 

2.5 System Performance 

The thoracic oncology tumor board experiments re-ported throughout this work used across-patient par-allelization with sequential chunk processing within each patient. Under this regime (10 patients in par-allel), the 30-patient cohort processes in 10 minutes (Table 5). The sequential baseline (no parallelization) required 74 minutes total processing time for the same 30-patient cohort. Full intra- and inter-patient parallelization of the build pipeline is only practical when the unifier stage can correctly reconcile events that appear in multiple chunks; the agentic interface (Section 2.1.4) provides this reconciliation and was used to measure end-to-end wall time under full parallelization. Running the agentic build on the held-out 30-patient test co-hort completed in 2.2 minutes end-to-end (mean per-patient build wall time 88 s, median 87 s, max 131 s for the bottleneck patient at 16 chunks and 158 TOA events). Per-patient stage timings under the agentic pipeline were dominated by the final display-synthesis step, with per-chunk extraction running concurrently in Ōł╝21 s on average and the unifier and episode-synthesis steps each adding under a few sec-onds. Extraction quality under the agentic pipeline on the test30 cohort is reported in Section 2.3; the ex-act per-stage model assignments and orchestration are detailed in Appendix H. The real-world workflow speedup from preparation automation remains to be determined prospectively. As a reference point, establishing chart-reviewed ground truth for the evaluation required approxi-mately 40ŌĆō60 minutes per patient for a clinician to review and annotate the target variables. This places manual ground-truth construction for the 30-patient validation subset at roughly 20ŌĆō30 clinician-hours, compared with 2.2 minutes of automated processing under the fully agentic build. Graph operations via NetworkX executed in 0.1ŌĆō 1.5 ms for temporal, episodic, and measurement queries, with retrieval reduced to deterministic graph traversal over the pre-computed TOA layer. End-to-end chat latency remained clinically respon-sive at 1ŌĆō3 seconds total (Stage 1 planning + Stage 2 graph execution <10 ms + Stage 3 narrative genera-tion), with the bulk of wall time consumed by down-stream LLM generation rather than retrieval. The de-terministic MEDS Graph construction step itself com-pleted in a median of 0.1 s per patient (representative large patient in Fig. 3: Ōł╝10,385 nodes built in 0.6 s with peak memory under 15 MB; the cohort-wide maximum record contained 136,508 nodes); every TOA event linked to at least one source XML frag-ment, and provenance lookups returned in under 0.01 s. Coverage of six representative graph-resident retrieval targets on the test30 cohort is reported in Appendix D.5 (Supplementary Table S1). For de-ployments larger than a single research cohort, the same graph schema is compatible with Neo4j, en-abling consolidation into a population-scale graph with Cypher-based cohort queries. 

2.6 Graph-Guided Patient Retrieval 

A key advantage of structuring patient data into stan-dardized, queryable artifacts is the ability to perform cross-patient retrieval across the full cohort without additional EHR reprocessing. As a demonstration, we built a patient similarity module that surfaces clin-ically relevant patients from the 1,180-patient co-hort, showing that a straightforward application of 11 Category VISTA RAG (GPT-4.1) RAG (GPT-5) 

Demographics 9.96 (100.0%) 8.26 (81.1%) 8.34 (80.0%) Tumor 9.72 (96.0%) 7.97 (70.0%) 8.04 (70.0%) Clinical 9.65 (96.7%) 6.10 (46.7%) 7.92 (68.3%) Treatment 9.72 (96.7%) 7.26 (60.0%) 6.83 (52.2%) Imaging 9.77 (96.7%) 7.17 (66.7%) 6.93 (63.3%) Safety 9.67 (93.3%) 8.00 (66.7%) 7.43 (56.7%) 

Overall 9.76 (96.9%) 7.58 (66.7%) 7.73 (66.9%) 

Table 4: VISTA Architect vs. RAG baseline accuracy by clinical category after excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint (N=30 patients, 450 evaluations per system). RAG uses BM25 retrieval over raw EHR XML with focused per-variable queriesŌĆöthe configuration most favorable to lexical retrieval. Full per-variable results in Appendix G. 

Figure 3: Single-patient MEDS Graph construction performance for VISTA Architect. Build time and peak memory usage are shown for the programmatic XML-to-graph conversion step for representative small ( <1 MB XML, Ōł╝500 MEDS Graph nodes), mid-sized ( Ōł╝2 MB XML, Ōł╝2,200 nodes), and large ( Ōł╝5 MB XML, Ōł╝10,000 nodes) patients. All MEDS Graphs are constructed in under one second and under 20 MB of memory, showing approximately linear scaling with patient record size. Note that the subsequent LLM-based TOA event extraction step requires additional time; per-patient end-to-end build times under the fully agentic pipeline are reported in Section 2.5 (mean 88 s, median 87 s, max 131 s on the test30 cohort). 

Regime Wall Time Speedup 

Sequential (one patient at a time, sequential chunks) 74 min 1.0 ├Ś

Across-patient (10 patients in parallel, sequential chunks within patient) 10 min 7├Ś

Fully agentic (intra- and inter-patient parallel, measured) 2.2 min 34 ├Ś

Table 5: Parallelization impact for the 30-patient test cohort. All rows report measured wall time. The first two rows are the sequential pipeline under single-patient and batched-across-patient regimes; the bottom row is the fully agentic build (Section 2.1.4) on the held-out test30 cohort, including all chunk extraction, unification, episode synthesis, and display generation stages. 

the pre-computed graph artifacts is already a work-ing retrieval systemŌĆönot a final product, but an illustration that the architecture readily supports cross-patient analyses without re-touching the raw 12 EHR. This capability operationalizes the emerging paradigm of smart patient retrieval ŌĆöAI systems that surface similar prior cases with known outcomes to provide contextual evidence on disease trajectories, treatment responses, and trial opportunities during tumor board deliberationŌĆöoffering a concrete start-ing point for the kind of retrieval recently advocated for precision oncology.[20] The module is not designed to maximize a single no-tion of overall similarity. Different clinical questions privilege different facets of a patientŌĆÖs record: a ques-tion about expected toxicity from a novel EGFR-MET combination requires patients matched on driver bi-ology; a question about whether to attempt salvage surgery after progression on first-line immunother-apy requires patients matched on treatment trajec-tory; a question about an unusual presentation pat-tern requires matching on the narrative descriptions in the patientŌĆÖs pre-tumor-board summary note. The module therefore exposes explicit weights over dis-tinct retrieval components, so that the same under-lying graph can serve different retrieval objectives without re-indexing. The pipeline operates in four stages (Figure 4). 

Stage 1 (Hard Gate) filters the cohort by diagnosis category (NSCLC, SCLC, mesothelioma, thymoma) and metastatic status, reducing 1,180 candidates to a clinically compatible subset (typically 30ŌĆō500 pa-tients). Stage 2 (Weighted Multi-Component Re-trieval) applies three parallel scoring components, each targeting a distinct facet of clinical similar-ity. The relative contribution of each component is controlled by weights wbio , wtraj , wnarr , which for this demonstration were set to equal contribution (wbio = wtraj = wnarr = 1/3): 1. Biology component: Weighted Jaccard similarity on driver mutation profiles (EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1, BRAF, MET, RET, NTRK, HER2) with sec-ondary terms for histology and PD-L1 concor-dance. Matching actionable driver mutations (e.g., both EGFR-positive) receive 3 ├Ś weight, re-flecting their outsized influence on treatment se-lection. 2. Trajectory component: Composite score based on treatment line number, therapeutic intent (cu-rative vs. palliative), regimen drug class overlap (14 classes: platinum doublet, immunotherapy, EGFR TKI, etc.), and prior surgery/radiation sta-tus. 3. Narrative component: BM25 ranking on each pa-tientŌĆÖs pre-tumor-board summary note. This note is generated by VISTA Architect at patient inges-tion following the standard Stanford pre-tumor-board summary procedureŌĆöa concise clinical summary of the same format presented at current Stanford tumor board meetingsŌĆöand is stored as a graph-resident artifact alongside the struc-tured TOA layer. Because the note is part of the architecture and is generated for every patient at ingestion time, it is available as a query input for any patient (including the index patient, before that patientŌĆÖs actual board meeting). The narra-tive component captures clinical descriptors not always represented in structured fields (e.g., ŌĆ£bi-lateral involvement,ŌĆØ ŌĆ£brain metastases,ŌĆØ ŌĆ£poor functional statusŌĆØ). Each component returns its top-5 candidates; after deduplication, 10ŌĆō15 candidates advance to Stage 3 (Context Assembly) , where the index patientŌĆÖs full clinical profile and each candidateŌĆÖs compressed pro-file are packed into a single prompt ( Ōł╝15ŌĆō20K to-kens). Stage 4 (LLM Clinical Judge) uses a reason-ing model to evaluate candidates and select 1ŌĆō5 final matches, providing per-match rationale, key differ-ences, and the matched patientŌĆÖs post-tumor-board trajectory. Critically, Stages 1ŌĆō3 require no LLM calls :the retrieval index is pre-computed from the same patient_info.json , episodes.json , and 

summary.json artifacts generated during per-patient TOA construction. Index construction for 1,180 patients completes in under 5 seconds, and retrieval executes in under 100 ms per query. Only the final clinical judge step (Stage 4) requires a single LLM call. As an illustrative query, querying an EGFR-positive metastatic adenocarcinoma patient on second-line palliative therapy retrieved 14 candidates from 554 13 after hard gating. The top-ranked matchŌĆöalso EGFR-positive adenocarcinoma on second-line pal-liative intentŌĆöachieved a biology score of 1.0 and trajectory score of 0.87, with multi-component re-trieval surfacing this patient through both the biol-ogy and trajectory components independently. The equal-weight setting used here is a default rather than a fixed choice. If a specific retrieval task war-ranted emphasizing one facet over anotherŌĆöfor ex-ample, weighting biology more heavily when the clinical question concerns mutational analogues, or weighting narrative when targeting an unusual pre-sentation patternŌĆöthe same underlying graph arti-facts support arbitrary weight configurations with-out re-indexing. 

## 3 Discussion 

VISTA Architect addresses critical challenges en-countered by multidisciplinary tumor boards, par-ticularly the difficulty of synthesizing fragmented clinical narratives derived from complex electronic health record (EHR) data.[ 1 , 2 , 3 , 21 ] Traditional methods often require repetitive re-processing of extensive EHR records at query time, introducing substantial computational overhead and latency. In contrast, VISTA Architect structures clinical data into a persistent, temporally structured, and context-specific Timeline Object Architecture (TOA) data plane, inherently capturing critical information re-quired for clinical decision-making. This approach reduces computational demands and enables near-instantaneous query response. The architectural advantage of VISTA Architect is not that graph databases categorically replace rela-tional storage. The lowest EHR layer could in prin-ciple be backed by SQL, document stores, or other clinical data systems. The key distinction is repre-sentational: VISTA transforms longitudinal docu-mentation into a hierarchical, clinically navigable structure. The MEDS Graph preserves source-level detail; the TOA Graph abstracts that detail into tem-porally resolved clinical events; and the episode and current-state layers compress the event stream into clinically meaningful phases and decision-ready ar-tifacts. Query-time reasoning therefore begins from an organized patient state and traverses downward only when source-level evidence is needed. This changes the role of retrieval. A relational query can return rows satisfying predefined predicates, and a RAG system can retrieve text fragments match-ing a query. In VISTA, the TOA layer provides a clin-ical map of the record: diagnosis, treatment phases, progression events, imaging anchors, toxicities, and current state are represented as connected objects. The agent can therefore retrieve by following clini-cally meaningful edges and targeting relevant nodes, rather than scanning or reassembling the patient his-tory from raw tables or documents. This resembles how clinicians navigate a chart: they begin with the known clinical story, then drill into the specific note, report, image, or lab value needed to verify a claim. Viewed from an information-processing perspective, the architecture functions as a log-compressed clini-cal tree built to minimize information loss while max-imizing navigability. The TOA and episode layers are structured compressions of the longitudinal EHR that preserve clinically salient state transitions, rela-tionships, and provenance while organizing infor-mation at progressively higher levels of abstraction. For an average downstream query, many high-level facts are already present in context, and the model only needs to retrieve incremental details. This re-duces the amount of text passed into the model, the amount of reasoning required to reconstruct patient state, and the number of source-level lookups, while retaining access to the original EHR when needed. Because the representation is graph-based, new node types, edge types, provenance links, or specialty-specific episode definitions can be added without re-defining the entire system. The same source-faithful graph can therefore support multiple clinical con-figurations and downstream tools, including dash-boards, similarity search, automated note writing, plotting, and conversational agents. Pre-computing the graph also exposes a clean sub-strate for agents. Because TOA assertions are provenance-tracked and graph-resident, agents can operate over deterministic, audited context with-out performing their own raw-text retrieval. This allowed the build pipeline, dashboard generation, 14 Stage 1 Hard Gate 1,180 ŌåÆ 30ŌĆō500 

Stage 2 Weighted Multi-Component Retrieval 

> Biology (wbio )
> Trajectory (wtraj )
> Narrative (wnarr )

Stage 3 Context Assembly 10ŌĆō15 candidates, Ōł╝20K tokens 

Stage 4 LLM Clinical Judge 1ŌĆō5 final matches + rationale 

Figure 4: Graph-guided patient similarity pipeline. Stages 1ŌĆō3 operate entirely on pre-computed TOA artifacts without LLM calls. Three retrieval components each score a candidate on a distinct facet of clinical similarity, combined through tunable weights: wbio weights biology (Jaccard overlap of driver-mutation profiles, with histology and PD-L1 concordance); wtraj weights treatment trajectory (agreement in line number, therapeutic intent, and regimen drug-class); and wnarr weights narrative (BM25 lexical match over each patientŌĆÖs pre-tumor-board summary note). Because these weights are applied at query time over the same pre-computed index, the graph can serve different retrieval objectives without re-indexing. Only Stage 4 requires a single LLM invocation for final clinical judgment. 

chat, and similarity retrieval to share a single agentic interface (Section 2.1.4) while inheriting the struc-tural guarantees of the graph layer underneath it. This shared agentic interface was the configuration used to measure wall-time gains under full intra-and inter-patient parallelization without degrada-tion of extraction quality (Section 2.5). These performance characteristics should be con-textualized against the broader landscape of LLM-based clinical information extraction. While LLMs have demonstrated strong capabilities for single-document summarization tasks where the input fits within the modelŌĆÖs context window,[ 7 ] the chal-lenge of extracting structured clinical variables from full longitudinal EHR recordsŌĆöspanning years of documentation and thousands of eventsŌĆöremains substantially harder. A recent meta-analysis of 56 studies evaluating LLM integration in oncology decision-making reported an average overall accu-racy of 76.2%, with diagnostic accuracy at 67.4%.[ 14 ]Agentic multi-agent approaches such as the Health-care Agent Orchestrator achieved 84% strict recall on high-importance tumor board facts across 71 patients,[ 15 ] and optimized clinical RAG pipelines for note-level extraction reported F1 scores of 0.79ŌĆō 0.90 depending on retrieval strategy.[ 13 ] VISTA Ar-chitect achieved 96.4% accuracy across 17,700 eval-uations in 1,180 patients on the longitudinal whole-record extraction task. In our matched comparison on a 30-patient subset, a standard BM25 RAG base-line using the same LLMs achieved approximately 67% accuracy where VISTA Architect achieved 96.9% (Section 2.3). These results indicate that the evalua-tion task is non-trivialŌĆöa standard RAG approach does not trivially solve itŌĆöand that VISTA Archi-tectŌĆÖs high accuracy is not an artifact of an easy benchmark. VISTA ArchitectŌĆÖs demonstrated thoracic tumor board use case can be viewed as an automation and extension of a summarization workflow already developed and deployed at our institution:[ 18 ]whereas that system summarizes a fixed lookback 15 window of recent notes into a single live artifact, the precomputed, provenance-linked timeline yields the same summary note as one of several reusable artifacts, alongside structured variables and cross-patient retrieval. That deployment experience also indicates that, for well-specified summarization tasks, tightly constrained workflows can match or exceed higher-autonomy agentic designs; VISTA Ar-chitect is consistent with this principle, as its agen-tic layer operates over a deterministic, provenance-tracked graph rather than performing unconstrained retrieval, and its fully agentic build is used to par-allelize processing without altering extraction accu-racy (Section 2.3). While VISTA Architect was conceived with gen-eral clinical workflows in mind, the current imple-mentation and validation have been demonstrated within thoracic oncology tumor boards. The archi-tecture supports flexibility in defining new node and edge types through configurable profiles; however, further empirical validation in additional clinical contexts remains necessary to substantiate broader claims about specialty agnosticism. The present evaluation is based on a single-center implementation using exclusively English-language documentation. Future expansions to multiple cen-ters, varied healthcare settings, and multilingual clin-ical documentation will be important to comprehen-sively assess generalizability and robustness. Addi-tionally, the architectureŌĆÖs reliance on accurate and complete original EHR data is a notable limitation, as incomplete documentation inherently impacts the accuracy and completeness of the derived clin-ical narratives. A related limitation is that OMOP-derived data exports do not capture all sources that clinicians reference in practiceŌĆöCare Everywhere notes, external lab results, and outside-institution records may be absent. This limitation is partially mitigated by our evaluation cutoff: ground truth was truncated at tumor-board-date minus one day, which guarantees that the available record was at minimum sufficient for the actual tumor board meet-ing to have proceeded. Downstream events occur-ring outside the index institution (e.g., mortality as-certainment or recurrence detection) are more sub-stantially affected by these coverage gaps and would require complementary data sources. Future directions for VISTA Architect include ex-panding validation across multiple sites, integrating multimodal data such as imaging and genomic in-formation, and enhancing capabilities for managing larger patient cohorts. Prospective studies evalu-ating impacts on clinical workflow efficiency, user satisfaction, and clinical decision quality are also planned to provide a comprehensive assessment of the systemŌĆÖs clinical utility. Several extensions are deferred to future work: ablation studies isolating the contribution of each TOA layer; explicit vali-dation of the temporal-normalization step against chart-reviewed event dates; expanded clinician adju-dication beyond the 30-patient calibration subset; and stronger retrieval baselines including dense-embedding and long-context single-pass configura-tions. The BM25 comparison reported in Section 2.4 is best interpreted as a coarse graph-versus-no-graph ablation rather than as a head-to-head against an op-timized clinical RAG system. In summary, VISTA Architect demonstrates a pre-computation paradigm for integrating large, com-plex document repositories with LLM-driven appli-cations: by constructing a structured, temporally aware knowledge graph once from raw source data, the system transforms the retrieval problem from a per-query search into a deterministic graph traver-sal, addressing both the accuracy and the speed re-quirements of high-stakes decision-making.[ 4, 5 , 6 ]While validated here in thoracic oncology tumor boards, the underlying architectureŌĆöconfigurable node types, episode structures, and provenance-tracked event timelinesŌĆömay be applicable to other settings where longitudinal, heterogeneous docu-ment collections must be made reliably accessible to AI systems; such applications will require prospec-tive validation in their own clinical contexts. 

## 4 Methods (Evaluation) 

4.1 Dataset 

Our evaluation cohort comprised 1,180 thoracic on-cology patients drawn from the VISTA Oncology 

16 Data Lake , a multi-modal clinical data resource estab-lished by Stanford MedicineŌĆÖs Research Technology group (full description in Appendix B 2). The Data Lake integrates clinical notes, genomic data, and imaging metadata together with the Stanford Cancer Registry, covering approximately 222,000 patients across the Stanford hospital ecosystems; the deriva-tion of the 1,180-patient evaluation cohort is sum-marized in Supplementary Fig. S1. Patient inclusion in the Data Lake requires either a documented tu-mor board encounter in the source EHR or a record in the Stanford Cancer Registry (which feeds the California Cancer Registry). The clinical dataset is delivered as BigQuery tables transformed from the source Epic Clarity instances to the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) Common Data Model, derived from StanfordŌĆÖs STARR-OMOP electronic health record representation. For VISTA Architect, each patientŌĆÖs OMOP-formatted record was exported from the Data Lake and converted into the MEDS XML representation (Section 2.1) that serves as input to the MEDS Graph. All records are Safe Harbor de-identified by Research Technol-ogy before extraction; in particular, all dates (in-cluding dates of birth, death, and service dates) are shifted by a per-patient offset of ┬▒30 days (ex-cluding zero), which preserves intra-patient tempo-ral ordering while removing the original calendar dates. No protected health information left the in-stitutional perimeter during analysis (Stanford IRB protocol 76049 ). All LLM inference was carried out through PHI-compliant servicesŌĆöStanford Se-cureGPT (Azure OpenAI) for the sequential pipeline and Google Vertex AI for the agentic pipelineŌĆöso that patient data never left the institutional data perimeter at any stage. 

4.2 Accuracy Assessment 

We evaluated VISTA ArchitectŌĆÖs clinical accuracy using a structured, variable-level evaluation proto-col across all 1,180 patients. From each patient, we extracted 15 MTB-salient variables spanning six clin-ical categories: demographics (Date of Birth, Sex, Smoking Status), tumor characteristics (Diagnosis,   

> 2Public overview: https://susom.github.io/starr-oncology-data-lake-arpah/about.html .

Histology, Metastasis, Lymph Node Involvement, Genetic Testing Panel), clinical status (ECOG Per-formance Status, Therapy Toxicity/Comorbidities), treatment (Previous Surgery, Current Medical Ther-apy, Radiation Therapy), imaging (Date of Last CT), and safety (Allergies). This yielded 17,700 total vari-able evaluations. The variable set was designed to span both the structuredŌĆōunstructured spectrum and the range of extraction difficulty encountered in tumor board preparation, from variables resolvable from a sin-gle field to variables that require careful collection across the entire EHR history. Although several vari-ables (notably Date of Birth and Sex) are reliably available in structured OMOP fields and could in principle be extracted deterministically, we deliber-ately designed the accuracy assessment so that ev-ery reported value was produced by the generative pipeline: this exposes any hallucination upstream of the note-extraction challenge, with the structured variables serving as positive controls (a value other than 100% accuracy on Date of Birth or Sex would indicate a regression in the pipeline). The remaining variables fall into two qualitatively different diffi-culty regimes. Collection variables ŌĆöPrevious Surgery, Therapy Toxicity / Comorbidities, and AllergiesŌĆö require sweeping the full longitudinal record and assembling a set; for Previous Surgery in particular, the evaluation deliberately includes non-oncological and remote surgical history (e.g., prior pediatric pro-cedures relevant to anesthesia or current surgical planning), which typically appears only in free-text past medical history rather than in structured proce-dure tables. Time-varying state variables ŌĆöECOG Per-formance Status, Current Medical Therapy, Metas-tasis, Lymph Node Involvement, and Date of Last CTŌĆörequire extracting the current status from multi-ple potentially conflicting mentions, where the tem-poral development of the variable matters. The 15 variables were selected to have a defined value for every oncology patient; absence of documentation is itself an informative value (e.g., no documented oncologic surgery is interpreted as ŌĆ£No Previous SurgeryŌĆØ), and the LLM-as-judge scored ŌĆ£no docu-mentationŌĆØ symmetrically against the ground-truth XML. 17 To establish ground truth, we used each patientŌĆÖs raw EHR XML truncated at the documented tu-mor board date, ensuring evaluation reflects only information available at the clinical decision point. We employed an LLM-as-judge approach[ 22 ] using GPT-5 to perform automated, bidirectional compar-ison between VISTA ArchitectŌĆÖs structured JSON outputs and the XML ground truth. The judge as-signed each variable a correctness label (Correct or Incorrect) and a 10-point quality score with de-tailed rationale. This approach has been validated in clinical settings, where LLM-based fact verification against EHR data achieves agreement with clinicians exceeding inter-clinician agreement.[ 23 ] An LLM-as-judge fact-scoring pipeline using the same model family (GPT-5) was independently validated against physician fact-scoring for thoracic tumor board sum-maries at the same institution, reporting judgeŌĆō physician agreement comparable to inter-physician agreement,[ 18 ] supporting its use as a scalable eval-uator in this setting. To calibrate the LLM-as-judge in our setting, a clinician independently reviewed all 480 variable evaluations across the randomly se-lected, representative 30-patient subset described above, classifying each judge decision as Agree, Un-certain, or Disagree against chart-reviewed ground truth. All 30 patients were evaluated using the same 16-variable schema; variables without explicit doc-umentation were retained as valid evaluable states when clinically appropriate, such as the absence of documented oncologic surgery being interpreted as no Previous Surgery rather than as missing data. The evaluation pipeline uses distinct models across stages to avoid same-model self-evaluation: GPT-4.1 is used for chunk-level TOA event extraction (where parallelization speed is prioritized), while GPT-5 is used for downstream patient-info synthesis and, independently, as the LLM judge for the accuracy evaluation reported here. The same randomly selected, representative 30-patient subset was additionally used as the held-out test cohort for benchmarking the fully agentic par-allelized build (Section 2.1.4) and the RAG retrieval baseline (Section 2.4, Appendix G); no development of either system was conducted on this subset. Our scoring rubric balanced strictness with clinical realism. A score of 10 required exact or clinically equivalent matches between extracted and ground-truth values. Partial credit (scores 5ŌĆō9) was assigned for clinically accurate but incomplete informationŌĆö for example, correctly identifying adenocarcinoma histology but missing a specific mutation subtype. We adopted specialized handling for ambiguous clin-ical scenarios: metastasis and lymph node involve-ment were scored as Correct when imaging sug-gested disease without pathological confirmation, reflecting real-world MTB practice where treatment decisions must proceed on the basis of radiologic findings. The large evaluation cohort (N=1,180) provides sta-tistical power to estimate accuracy with narrow 95% confidence intervals. For mean scores, we report normal-approximation CIs; for proportion correct, we report Wilson score intervals. The scale of evalua-tion also mitigates a key concern with LLM-as-judge paradigms: at small sample sizes, correlated halluci-nations between extraction and evaluation models could systematically inflate accuracy. At N=1,180, such random concordance errors contribute neg-ligible bias ( <0.1 percentage points), and system-atic aligned errors are further mitigated by the ar-chitectural separation between extraction (graph-serialized input, deterministic retrieval context) and evaluation (raw XML ground truth, independent judge prompt). 

Decoding and determinism. All LLM calls in the production pipeline (GPT-4.1 chunk extraction, GPT-5 patient-info synthesis, GPT-5 LLM-as-judge) and in the agentic pipeline (Gemini 3.5 Flash per-chunk extraction and episode synthesis, Claude Opus 4.6 orchestrator / display) use vendor-default decod-ing settings: temperature 1.0, top-p 1.0, no explicit random seed, and provider default max_tokens .Reasoning-model parameters ( reasoning_effort 

for GPT-5, thinking_budget for Gemini 3.5 Flash) are not adjusted from their defaults except that 

thinking_budget is explicitly set to 0 for short-output Flash calls to avoid token starvation. No determinism guarantees are made or required for 18 the reported accuracy numbers, which are reported as single-run point estimates with binomial / Wilson confidence intervals appropriate to the evaluation sample size (Table 6). A completed TRIPOD-LLM reporting checklist (Gal-lifant et al., 2025) is provided as Supplemen-tary File S1, mapping each checklist item to the manuscript section in which it is addressed. 

4.3 Efficiency Benchmarks 

We measured VISTA ArchitectŌĆÖs computational per-formance at both the cohort and single-query level. At the cohort level, we measured end-to-end build wall time under two configurations: the sequential pipeline used to generate all results in Section 2.3 (running on one patient at a time, and additionally with 10 patients in parallel as the production regime), and the fully agentic pipeline (Section 2.1.4) running with full intra- and inter-patient parallelization. At the single-query level, we measured graph query latency across temporal, episodic, and measurement operations on the pre-computed TOA layer, and end-to-end chat latency encompassing all three stages of the agentic chat pipeline. 

## Code and Data Availability 

The VISTA Architect backendŌĆöcomprising MEDS XML to MEDS Graph conversion, TOA event ex-traction, episode synthesis, and graph-resident query infrastructureŌĆöis available as open source on GitHub at https://github.com/VISTA-Stanford/ vista-architect , together with example prompts sufficient to apply the pipeline to MEDS-formatted data from any source; the snapshot corresponding to this manuscript is tagged v0.1.0-preprint (com-mit 8837d44 ). The agentic implementation of the AI layer (Section 2.1.4, Appendix H) is released along-side the backend in the same repository. The produc-tion frontend (Dash/Plotly user interface) is not part of this release; the exact production prompts used for the thoracic oncology configuration are reproduced verbatim in Supplementary File S2. The meds2text 

library used in Step 1 is publicly available at https: //github.com/VISTA-Stanford/meds2text .The VISTA Oncology Data Lake from which the cohort was drawn is governed by Stanford Medicine TDS under the ARPA-H program; ac-cess procedures and eligibility are described at 

https://susom.github.io/starr-oncology-data-lake-arpah/about.html . Patient-level data cannot be redistributed by the authors. 

## Acknowledgments 

We thank the Stanford thoracic oncology team for clinical guidance throughout the development of VISTA Architect. We acknowledge Stanford MedicineŌĆÖs Technology and Digital Solutions (TDS) group, and in particular Somalee Datta, for build-ing and maintaining the VISTA Oncology Data Lake from which the cohort used in this study was drawn. This research was funded, in part, by the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (ARPA-H). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be inter-preted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government. T.K. was supported by the Finnish Cultural Foundation. 

## Competing Interests 

The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interests. 

## Author Contributions (CRediT) 

Conceptualization: T.K., M.A.R., S.P., J.F., P.A., D.W., T.J.E.-C., A.F., B.N., and J.N. Methodology: T.K., J.F., D.W., T.J.E.-C., and J.N. Software: T.K. and J.F. Val-idation: T.K., A.F., D.W., T.J.E.-C., and J.N. Formal analysis: T.K. Investigation: T.K. and P.A. Resources: J.F., P.A., B.N., S.P., and M.A.R. Data curation: T.K., J.F., P.A., and B.N. Visualization: T.K. Supervision: M.A.R. and S.P. Project administration: B.N., S.P., and M.A.R. Funding acquisition: S.P. and M.A.R. Writing ŌĆō original draft: T.K. and M.A.R. Writing ŌĆō review and editing: all authors. 19 Pipeline role Model identifier Serving endpoint Access window                         

> Chunk-level event extraction (sequential pipeline)
> gpt-4.1 Stanford SecureGPT (Azure OpenAI; PHI-compliant) Feb 2026 Patient-info synthesis (sequential pipeline)
> gpt-5 Stanford SecureGPT (Azure OpenAI) Feb 2026 LLM-as-Judge (accu-racy evaluation)
> gpt-5 Stanford SecureGPT (Azure OpenAI) Feb 2026 RAG baseline answer generation (variant 1)
> gpt-4.1 Stanford SecureGPT (Azure OpenAI) Apr 2026 RAG baseline answer generation (variant 2)
> gpt-5 Stanford SecureGPT (Azure OpenAI) Apr 2026 Per-chunk event extrac-tion & episode synthe-sis (agentic pipeline)
> gemini-3.5-flash Google Vertex AI (Stanford GCP project
> som-nero-plevriti-deidbdf )MayŌĆōJun 2026 Agentic orchestrator & display synthesis (agen-tic pipeline)
> claude-opus-4-6 Google Vertex AI (Stanford GCP project
> som-nero-plevriti-deidbdf )MayŌĆōJun 2026
> Table 6: Exact model identifiers, serving endpoints, and access windows for every LLM used in this study. Both endpoints are PHI-compliant: SecureGPT proxies Azure OpenAI inside the Stanford institutional perimeter; the Vertex AI project is a Stanford-managed GCP environment under the same data-use agreement. Decoding settings for all models are vendor defaults (┬¦4.2 ŌĆ£Decoding and determinismŌĆØ). Model identifiers are pulled verbatim from
> gsgpt.py (MODELS ,VERTEX_MODELS ,VERTEX_ANTHROPIC_MODELS ) and from the gcpclaude launcher environment.

## Ethics Approval 

This study was reviewed and approved by the Stan-ford University Institutional Review Board under protocol 76049 (same value as ┬¦4.1). The protocol covers secondary research use of de-identified EHR data extracted from the VISTA Oncology Data Lake. No protected health information left the institutional perimeter at any stage of analysis. The Data Lake is Safe Harbor de-identified by Stanford Medicine Research Technology before extraction, with per-patient date shifts of ┬▒30 days (excluding zero) to preserve intra-patient temporal ordering while re-moving the original calendar dates. Patient con-sent was waived in accordance with 45 CFR 46.116(f) on the basis of minimal risk and infeasibility of ob-taining individual consent for secondary use of de-identified records. 

## References 

[1] Jeffrey Budd. Burnout related to elec-tronic health record use in primary care. 

Journal of primary care & community health ,14:21501319231166921, 2023. [2] Christine Sinsky, Lacey Colligan, Ling Li, Mirela Prgomet, Sam Reynolds, Lindsey Goed-ers, Johanna Westbrook, Michael Tutty, and George Blike. Allocation of physician time in ambulatory practice: a time and motion study in 4 specialties. Annals of internal medicine ,165(11):753ŌĆō760, 2016. [3] Shasha Han, Tait D Shanafelt, Christine A Sinsky, Karim M Awad, Liselotte N Dyrbye, Lynne C Fiscus, Mickey Trockel, and Joel Goh. Estimating the attributable cost of physician burnout in the united states. Annals of internal medicine , 170(11):784ŌĆō790, 2019. [4] Richard D Hammer, Donna Fowler, Lincoln R Sheets, Athanasios Siadimas, Chaohui Guo, and Matthew S Prime. Digital tumor board so-lutions have significant impact on case prepara-tion. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics , 4:757ŌĆō768, 2020. [5] Alex Nobori, Chayanit Jumniensuk, Xiang Chen, Dieter Enzmann, Sarah Dry, Scott Nel-son, and Corey W Arnold. Electronic health 20 recordŌĆōintegrated tumor board application to save preparation time and reduce errors. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics , 6:e2100142, 2022. [6] Linda Chia-Fang Chang, Hsuan-Chih Kuo, Hung-Ming Wang, Yung-Chia Kuo, Ching-Ting Wang, Li-Chin Chen, and Jason Chia-Hsun Hsieh. The use of an integrated digital tool to improve the efficiency of multidisciplinary tumor boardsŌĆöa prospective trial in taiwan. 

Cancers , 17(3):444, 2025. [7] Dave Van Veen, Cara Van Uden, Louis Blanke-meier, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Asad Aali, Chris-tian Bluethgen, Anuj Pareek, Malgorzata Po-lacin, Eduardo Pontes Reis, Anna Seehofnerov├Ī, et al. Adapted large language models can out-perform medical experts in clinical text sum-marization. Nature medicine , 30(4):1134ŌĆō1142, 2024. [8] Lavender Yao Jiang, Xujin Chris Liu, Nima Pour Nejatian, Mustafa Nasir-Moin, Duo Wang, Anas Abidin, Kevin Eaton, Howard Antony Riina, Ilya Laufer, Paawan Punjabi, et al. Health system-scale language models are all-purpose prediction engines. 

Nature , 619(7969):357ŌĆō362, 2023. [9] Hejie Cui, Alyssa Unell, Bowen Chen, Ja-son Alan Fries, Emily Alsentzer, Sanmi Koyejo, and Nigam H Shah. Timer: Temporal instruc-tion modeling and evaluation for longitudinal clinical records. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):577, 2025. [10] Elham Asgari, Nina Monta├▒a-Brown, Magda Dubois, Saleh Khalil, Jasmine Balloch, Joshua Au Yeung, and Dominic Pimenta. A framework to assess clinical safety and hallucination rates of llms for medical text summarisation. NPJ digital medicine , 8(1):274, 2025. [11] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K├╝ttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt├żschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459ŌĆō9474, 2020. [12] Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Andreas R├╝ckl├®, Abhishek Srivastava, and Iryna Gurevych. Beir: A heterogenous benchmark for zero-shot eval-uation of information retrieval models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08663 , 2021. [13] Ivan Lopez, Akshay Swaminathan, Karthik Vedula, Sanjana Narayanan, Fateme Nateghi Haredasht, Stephen P Ma, April S Liang, Steven Tate, Manoj Maddali, Robert Joseph Gallo, et al. Clinical entity augmented retrieval for clinical information extraction. NPJ digital medicine , 8(1):45, 2025. [14] Yuexing Hao, Zhiwen Qiu, Jason Holmes, Corinna E L├Čckenhoff, Wei Liu, Marzyeh Ghas-semi, and Saleh Kalantari. Large language model integrations in cancer decision-making: a systematic review and meta-analysis. NPJ Digital Medicine , 8(1):450, 2025. [15] Matthias Blondeel, Noel Codella, Sam Preston, Hao Qiu, Leonardo Schettini, Frank Tuan, Wen-wai Yim, Smitha Saligrama, Mert ├¢z, Shrey Jain, et al. Healthcare agent orchestrator (hao) for pa-tient summarization in molecular tumor boards. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06602 , 2025. [16] George Hripcsak, Jon D Duke, Nigam H Shah, Christian G Reich, Vojtech Huser, Martijn J Schuemie, Marc A Suchard, Rae Woong Park, Ian Chi Kei Wong, Peter R Rijnbeek, et al. Ob-servational health data sciences and informat-ics (ohdsi): opportunities for observational re-searchers. Studies in health technology and infor-matics , 216:574, 2015. [17] Yong Shang, Yu Tian, Kewei Lyu, Tianshu Zhou, Ping Zhang, Jianghua Chen, and Jingsong Li. Electronic health recordŌĆōoriented knowledge graph system for collaborative clinical decision support using multicenter fragmented medical data: design and application study. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 26:e54263, 2024. 21 [18] Tim Ellis-Caleo, Timothy Keyes, Nerissa Am-bers, Faraah Bekheet, Wen-wai Yim, Nikesh Kotecha, Nigam H. Shah, and Joel Neal. De-velopment, evaluation, and deployment of a multi-agent system for thoracic tumor board. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12161 , 2026. [19] Bert Arnrich, Edward Choi, Jason Alan Fries, Matthew BA McDermott, Jungwoo Oh, Tom Pollard, Nigam Shah, Ethan Steinberg, Michael Wornow, and Robin van de Water. Medical event data standard (meds): Facilitating ma-chine learning for health. In ICLR 2024 Work-shop on Learning from Time Series For Health ,pages 03ŌĆō08, 2024. [20] Yan-Ran Joyce Wang and Akshay S. Chaudhari. Ai-driven smart patient retrieval for precision oncology. Nature Reviews Cancer , 26(5):305ŌĆō307, 2026. [21] Fred Schulte and Erika Fry. Death by 1,000 clicks: Where electronic health records went wrong. Kaiser Health News , 18, 2019. [22] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:46595ŌĆō46623, 2023. [23] Philip Chung, Akshay Swaminathan, Alex J Goodell, Yeasul Kim, S Momsen Reincke, Lichy Han, Ben Deverett, Mohammad Amin Sadeghi, Abdel-Badih Ariss, Marc Ghanem, et al. Ver-ifying facts in patient care documents gener-ated by large language models using electronic health records. NEJM AI , 3(1):AIdbp2500418, 2025. 22 Supplementary Information Supplementary Contents 

A. Supplementary Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

B. VISTA Oncology Data Lake: Supplementary Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 

C. MEDS Graph Schema (Hierarchical XML Representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 

D. TOA Graph Schema (Clinical Narrative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 

E. LLM Prompts (Production) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 

F. MTB Variable Dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

G. RAG Baseline Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

H. Agentic Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 23 A Supplementary Figures 

This section collects the supplementary figures referenced throughout the main text. Supplementary Fig. S1 summarizes selection of the evaluation cohort. Supplementary Figs. S2, S3, S4, and S5 illustrate the VISTA Architect user interfaceŌĆöthe Overview, Clinical Timeline, automated pre-tumor-board summary note, and chat viewsŌĆöeach rendered directly from graph-resident artifacts with provenance-linked access to the source EHR. Supplementary Fig. S6 shows the two-tier MEDS + TOA graph structure for a single representative patient. 

VISTA Oncology Data Lake 

Ōł╝222,000 patients (Stanford Medicine, all malignancies) 

Thoracic tumor board cohort 

documented thoracic tumor board encounter; first encounter on/after 1 January 2020 (de-identified) 

n = 1,180 (15 variables; 17,700 evaluations) 

Validation subset , n = 30 clinician concordance review, agentic build benchmark, and BM25 RAG comparison 

Figure S1: Cohort flow. Selection of the 1,180-patient thoracic oncology evaluation cohort from the VISTA Oncology Data Lake, and of the 30-patient subset used for clinician concordance review, the agentic build benchmark, and the BM25 RAG comparison. The full cohort contributes 15 tumor boardŌĆōsalient variables per patient (17,700 evaluations). 

24 Figure S2: VISTA Architect Overview view. A single-screen synopsis of the patient assembled from graph-resident artifacts: patient identity, staging assessment, primary diagnosis with molecular profile, current and prior treatment protocol, clinical history, and the most recent findings. All fields are populated from the TOA layer and the structured 

patient_info.json and summary.json artifacts produced during pipeline processing. Synthetic demonstration patient; not a real patient. 

25 Figure S3: VISTA Architect Clinical Timeline view. The longitudinal record organized into clinical episodesŌĆö diagnosis and numbered treatment lines, each with start/end dates, intent, and termination reasonŌĆöon the right, with the contributing imaging and assessment events aligned chronologically on the left. Toggles switch between the episode-level summary, the complete event log, and the raw EHR. The view is rendered directly from TOA episodes and events, preserving temporal structure and source provenance. Synthetic demonstration patient; not a real patient. 

26 Figure S4: VISTA Architect automated tumor board note. Automated pre-tumor-board summary note writing incorporates the whole patient history together with recorded tumor board decisions, generated from the same graph-resident artifacts. Synthetic demonstration patient; not a real patient. 

27 Figure S5: VISTA Architect chat interface. The chat interface answers queries either directly from the TOA data plane or by reaching into the MEDS Graph data plane through targeted agentic graph queries, with provenance-linked access to the source EHR. Synthetic demonstration patient; not a real patient. 

28 Figure S6: Two-tier graph structure for a single representative patient. Lower plane: the source-faithful MEDS Graph, whose nodes preserve the original EHR records (here dominated by measurements, source fragments, observations, clinical notes, and visits). Upper plane: the abstracted TOA Graph, in which clinical events are grouped into a small number of episode nodes (baseline, diagnosis, treatment line). Gold sourced-from edges link every TOA event back to its supporting MEDS evidence, making provenance explicit; contains , anchored-by , precedes , and 

followed-by edges organize the clinical timeline. Legend labels denote the semantic meaning of each node and edge in this configuration, not a fixed type vocabulary (Section 2.1.3). For this patient the Ōł╝1,750 MEDS-graph nodes are abstracted into Ōł╝77 TOA nodes; counts are illustrative of a single smaller-than-median patient (cohort median 3,608 MEDS-graph nodes). 

29 B VISTA Oncology Data Lake: Supplementary Note 

This appendix provides additional context on the VISTA Oncology Data Lake, the clinical data resource from which the 1,180-patient evaluation cohort in this study was drawn. The condensed version of this material in Section 4.1 covers the points directly relevant to the analyses reported in this paper; the description here documents the broader scope, source systems, and operational properties of the resource for readers seeking institutional context. 

Scope and modalities. The Virtual Intelligence for Specialized Tumor Board Assessment (VISTA) Oncol-ogy Data Lake is a multi-modal data repository designed to integrate diverse clinical modalitiesŌĆöincluding clinical notes, genomic data, and imaging dataŌĆöto facilitate oncology research and AI modeling. To bridge fragmentation of care across different clinics, the Data Lake also integrates the Stanford Cancer Registry. The Data Lake contains approximately 222,000 patients in total; approximately 12% of patients in the Stanford Cancer Registry have a documented tumor board encounter. 

Cohort inclusion criteria. A patient is included in the Data Lake if at least one of the following is true: (i) a documented tumor board presentation or evaluation in the source Electronic Health Record (EHR); or (ii) a verified analytic or non-analytic case in the Stanford Cancer Registry (SCR). The SCR tracks comprehensive disease histories dating back to 1988 and feeds into the California Cancer Registry. SCR analytic cases include patients whose first course of cancer treatment occurred at Stanford regardless of diagnosis location, and patients diagnosed at Stanford regardless of where they were subsequently treated (with potentially incomplete data in the latter case). SCR non-analytic casesŌĆöintroduced in 2024ŌĆöcapture additional cancer-related encounters such as patients treated at Stanford for recurrence only, patients followed at Stanford and found to be cancer-free, and consultation-only or end-of-life-care patients neither diagnosed nor treated at Stanford. 

Source systems. Source EHR data comes from the three Stanford hospital ecosystemsŌĆöStanford Health Care, Stanford ChildrenŌĆÖs Hospital (formerly Lucile Packard ChildrenŌĆÖs Hospital), and Stanford Healthcare Tri-ValleyŌĆötogether with the network of more than one hundred pediatric and adult care clinics affiliated with University HealthCare Alliance and Packard ChildrenŌĆÖs Health Alliance. These ecosystems use two independent Epic instances that share Epic Clarity data with Research Technology. Non-Epic clinical sources (radiology DICOMs, whole-slide imaging, genetic-testing results) are shared across the two hospital ecosystems and are processed from single source systems. The Stanford Cancer Registry is shared across both ecosystems and managed on the Neuralframe KACI vendor platform, with monthly database snapshots delivered to Research Technology. 

Data architecture. The Data Lake is delivered as BigQuery datasets on Google Cloud Platform. BigQuery is a fully managed, serverless, HIPAA-compliant enterprise data platform optimized for high-performance analytics on large multi-modal biomedical datasets, with decoupled storage and compute enabling complex SQL queries in seconds. Two independent BigQuery datasets (EHR and Registry) are linked by the unique patient identifier (Medical Record Number and Date of Birth). The clinical dataset is transformed from the two Epic Clarity instances to the unified Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) Common Data Model; the data includes Epic modules such as Epic Genetics, Epic Beaker, and Epic Beacon. DICOM and WSI metadata are included in custom tables alongside the OMOP CDM. Registry data undergoes minimal ETL to preserve the original California Cancer Registry data model. The Data Lake is refreshed 30 quarterly, with each release accompanied by updated metrics and release-specific information at the Data LakeŌĆÖs public overview page; version-specific metadata such as gene lists per genetic-test version are also hosted there. 

Privacy and de-identification. The Data Lake is PHI-scrubbed using Safe Harbor methods: PHI is replaced with surrogates, and all datesŌĆöincluding dates of birth, death, and service datesŌĆöare shifted by a per-patient offset that is unique across all datasets and data types, is between ŌłÆ30 and +30 days, and is never zero. This preserves the intra-patient timeline while removing the original calendar dates. Because of the large amount of unstructured data (clinical notes, DICOMs), the Stanford University Privacy Office has determined that additional Expert Determination is required for the Data Lake to be declared formally de-identified; the security requirements currently applied are comparable to NIH dbGaP datasets. 31 C MEDS Graph Schema (Hierarchical XML Representation) 

The MEDS Graph represents raw EHR data as a hierarchical structure preserving all original detail with granular provenance. The node and edge types listed in this appendix are the instantiation used in the thoracic oncology configuration evaluated here; they describe the semantic role each source record plays in the graph rather than a fixed schema, and additional types can be defined for other source systems or clinical domains. Figure S6 shows both graph layers for a single representative patient. 

C.1 Node Types 

C.1.1 Person Node (Demographics) 

{"node_type": "Person", "patient_id": "cohort1_136040534", "birth_datetime": "1937-09-20", "gender": "Male", "race": "White", "ethnicity": "Not Hispanic" }

C.1.2 Visit Node (Encounter Container) 

{"node_type": "Visit", "visit_id": "visit_67890", "visit_start_date": "2023-01-18", "visit_end_date": "2023-01-18", "visit_type": "Outpatient|Inpatient|Emergency" }

C.1.3 Event Nodes (Typed by EHR Source) 

// Note Event {"node_type": "Event", "event_type": "note", "event_id": "evt_note_5678", "note_id": "12345", "note_type": "Progress Note", "timestamp": "2023-01-18 09:30:00", "visit_id": "visit_67890", "care_site_id": "cs_oncology_clinic", "provider_id": "prov_oncologist_123" }// Measurement Event (Lab Panel) {"node_type": "Event", "event_type": "measurement", 

32 "event_id": "evt_lab_panel_cbc_2023_01_15", "measurement_id": "panel_cbc_2023_01_15", "panel_name": "Complete Blood Count", "timestamp": "2023-01-15 08:00:00", "visit_id": "visit_67889" }// Individual Lab Value (Measurement Decomposition) {"node_type": "Event", "event_type": "measurement", "event_id": "evt_lab_wbc_2023_01_15", "measurement_id": "meas_wbc_2023_01_15", "lab_name": "WBC", "value": 5.2, "units": "K/uL", "abnormal": false, "reference_range": "4.5-11.0" }// Image Event {"node_type": "Event", "event_type": "image", "event_id": "evt_img_ct_chest_2023_01_20", "image_id": "img_ct_12345", "modality": "CT", "body_site": "chest", "timestamp": "2023-01-20 14:00:00" }// Radiology Report (linked to Image) {"node_type": "Event", "event_type": "note", "event_subtype": "radiology_report", "event_id": "evt_note_rad_ct_chest_2023_01_20", "note_id": "rad_report_67890", "linked_image_id": "img_ct_12345", "timestamp": "2023-01-20 16:30:00" }

C.1.4 XMLFragment Node (Provenance Anchor / Source Fragment) 

Granular provenance at the note/procedure/measurement level. This is the node shown as source fragment 

in Figure S6. 

{"node_type": "XMLFragment", "fragment_id": "frag_note_2023_01_18_5678", "evidence_date": "2023-01-18", "fragment_type": "note", 

33 "source_id": "note_5678" }

C.2 Edge Types 

ŌĆó VISIT_CONTAINS : Visit ŌåÆ Event (events grouped under their encounter) ŌĆó IMAGE_REPORT_FOR : RadiologyReport ŌåÆ Image (report describes image) ŌĆó PROCEDURE_FOR : Image ŌåÆ Procedure (image is part of procedure) ŌĆó HAS_MEASUREMENT : LabPanel ŌåÆ LabValue (panel contains individual values) ŌĆó PRECEDES : Event ŌåÆ Event (temporal ordering within visit) ŌĆó SOURCED_FROM : TOAEvent ŌåÆ XMLFragment (provenance to EHR source) 

C.3 Key Features 

1. Measurement Granularity: Lab panels decomposed into individual queryable values 2. Radiology Coupling: Explicit edges link imaging reports to images 3. Visit Grouping: All events within a visit are children of a Visit node via VISIT_CONTAINS 

4. Provenance: Every event linked to exact EHR source via XMLFragment nodes 5. Fast Construction: Build time Ōł╝0.10s for a representative Ōł╝2,200-node patient ( Ōł╝2MB XML) 6. Low Memory: Typically <5MB even for 8+ years of longitudinal care 

## D TOA Graph Schema (Clinical Narrative) 

The TOA Graph synthesizes MEDS Graph data into a deduplicated, temporally-corrected clinical narrative with episodes and events. The event types, episode kinds, and edge types described below are the thoracic oncology configuration and capture the semantic meaning of each element; they are freely modifiable within the architecture rather than a fixed, canonical vocabulary, and new event types, episode kinds, and edges can be defined for other clinical domains (Section 2.1.3; Figure S6). 

D.1 Event Node Schema 

Events represent distinct clinical occurrences with ontological deduplication.    

> {"event_id": "evt_12345", "date": "2023-01-20", // clinical occurrence date "evidence_date": "2023-01-20", // first documentation date "source_event_refs": ["E1", "E5", "E12"], // MEDS Graph event references (provenance) "type": "imaging|diagnostic|treatment|surgery|lab|symptom| examination|procedure|adverse_effect|baseline_information| critical_information", "subtype": "ct|mri|pet-ct|biopsy|blood_test|...|null", "modality": "ct|mri|xray|pet|pet-ct|ultrasound|null", // imaging only

34 "site": "chest|head|abdomen|pelvis|spine|bone|whole_body|null", "laterality": "left|right|bilateral|null", "description": "<=80 chars, compact and factual", "priority": "MAJOR|MINOR", "values": { // lab events only "Hgb": "9.8", "WBC": "17.6" }}

Event Types (Thoracic Oncology): 

ŌĆó imaging : CT, MRI, PET-CT, X-ray (with findings) ŌĆó diagnostic : Biopsies, pathology, molecular testing (EGFR, ALK, PD-L1) ŌĆó treatment : Systemic therapies (chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted) ŌĆó surgery : Resections, biopsies (lobectomy, wedge, pneumonectomy) ŌĆó lab : Blood tests, tumor markers (when abnormal/decision-informing) ŌĆó adverse_effect : Treatment toxicities, complications (PE, neutropenia, fractures) ŌĆó baseline_information : Pre-existing conditions (smoking, COPD, prior cancers) ŌĆó critical_information : Code status (DNR/DNI), goals of care, performance status 

D.2 Episode Node Schema 

Episodes group events into clinically meaningful phases. 

{"episode_id": "ep_txline_1", "kind": "baseline|diagnosis|treatment_line|post_oncological", "start_date": "2023-01-15", "end_date": "2023-07-20", "anchor_event_id": "evt_carbo_pem_pembro_start", "event_ids": ["evt_12345", "evt_67890", ...], // all events in episode // Treatment line specific (kind = "treatment_line") "line_number": 1, "treatment": "carboplatin/pemetrexed/pembrolizumab", "intent": "curative|palliative|adjuvant|neoadjuvant|null", "clinical_context": "Carbo/Pem/Pembro: initial partial response (6.5->4.2cm), then bone progression on PET", "termination_reason": "progression|toxicity|completion|no_effect|null" }

Episode Kinds (Thoracic Tumor Board): 

1. baseline : Pre-oncological background (smoking history, comorbidities, family history) 35 2. diagnosis : Initial diagnostic workup ŌåÆ treatment decision 3. treatment_line : Line of therapy (may include surgery, chemo, radiation as planned) 4. post_oncological : Hospice, palliative care only, end of active treatment 

D.3 Edge Types 

ŌĆó PRECEDES : Event ŌåÆ Event (temporal ordering) ŌĆó CONTAINS : Episode ŌåÆ Event (episode membership) ŌĆó ANCHORED_BY : Episode ŌåÆ Event (episode starts with this event) ŌĆó FOLLOWED_BY : Episode ŌåÆ Episode (treatment sequence) ŌĆó SAME_DAY : Event Ōåö Event (co-occurrence, same encounter) ŌĆó SOURCED_FROM : Event ŌåÆ MEDSXMLFragment (provenance to EHR source) 

D.4 Key Features 

1. Temporal Correction: Distinguishes clinical occurrence date from documentation date 2. Deduplication: Same condition mentioned 50 times ŌåÆ single event node 3. Complete Provenance: Every event links to MEDS Graph source via source_event_refs 

4. Episodic Structure: Treatment lines organize events into decision-relevant phases 5. Fast Queries: Graph traversal <1ms 

D.5 Deterministic retrieval coverage on the test30 cohort 

To verify that the TOA Graph in fact supports the deterministic retrieval claimed in the main text, we measured the coverage of six representative graph-resident retrieval targets across the 30-patient test cohort (Table S1). The selected targets span a range of clinical-information types: standard structured fields (drug exposures), free-text-anchored content (metastasis mentions, lymph node mentions), the latest specific documents (latest oncology note, latest chest CT report), and a more challenging extraction target (driver mutations, which may be recorded under multiple gene-name aliases or only in narrative form). Each target was implemented as a deterministic graph query over the pre-computed TOA layer with provenance back to the MEDS Graph. All queries executed in under 0.01 s per patient, and coverage on the 30-patient cohort ranged from 73% to 100% depending on the information type. 

Retrieval Target Coverage Query Time 

Metastasis mentions 100% (30/30) <0.01s Lymph node mentions 97% (29/30) <0.01s Drug exposures 100% (30/30) <0.01s Latest oncology note 93% (28/30) <0.01s Latest chest CT report 87% (26/30) <0.01s Driver mutations 73% (22/30) <0.01s  

> Table S1: Deterministic graph-resident retrieval coverage on the 30-patient test cohort. All queries executed via NetworkX traversal of the pre-computed TOA layer.

36 E LLM Prompts (Production) 

The blocks below summarize the structure and key instructions of each production prompt for readability. The complete, verbatim production promptsŌĆöbyte-for-byte as used in the pipeline, with Source and Model 

headersŌĆöare reproduced in Supplementary File S2, which follows the same E.x numbering used here. 

E.1 Phase 1: Event Extraction (Chunk Processing) 

Source: toa/prompts/timeline_compact.txt | Model: GPT-4.1 (fast, parallel) 

Extract structured clinical events from EHR XML chunk. Return valid JSON: {"events":[ {"date": "YYYY-MM-DD", // clinical occurrence "evidence_date": "YYYY-MM-DD", // first documentation "source_event_refs": ["E1","E5"], // REQUIRED: MEDS Graph provenance "type": "imaging|diagnostic|treatment|surgery|lab|symptom| adverse_effect|baseline_information|critical_information", "modality": "ct|mri|pet|pet-ct|xray|ultrasound|null", "site": "chest|head|abdomen|pelvis|spine|bone|null", "description": "<=80 chars", "priority": "MAJOR|MINOR", "values": {"Hgb":"9.8","WBC":"17.6"} // labs only }]} DISTINCTIONS: - baseline_information: Pre-existing (smoking, COPD, prior cancers, family history) - may be mentioned later but predates diagnosis - critical_information: DNR/DNI, goals of care, performance status, prior external studies mentioned in notes VARIABLES (thoracic oncology): Binary: Lymph Node Involvement, Metastases, Pleural Effusion, Driver Mutation Categorical: Histology, TNM components, ECOG, PD-L1, Treatment Response Discrete: Pack-Years, Tumor Size (cm), Prior Lines, Metastatic Sites Continuous: CEA, FEV1 (%), LDH, Hemoglobin, Radiation Dose (Gy) Genetics: EGFR, ALK, KRAS, PD-L1, ROS1, BRAF, MET, RET, NTRK PROVENANCE: For EVERY event, cite MEDS Graph sources in source_event_refs using [E1], [E2] tags from SOURCE EVENTS section. RULES: - Extract each imaging study SEPARATELY (PET-CT, MRI, CT are 3 events) - Imaging + adverse effect = TWO events (imaging + adverse_effect) - Baseline: smoking, allergies -> baseline_information - Code status during treatment -> critical_information - Extract prior external studies -> critical_information - Labs: only abnormal/decision-informing values SAFETY (always extract): - Adverse: PE, DVT, sepsis, pneumonia, hemorrhage, fractures, ICU 

37 - Bleeding risk: anticoagulation, thrombocytopenia, IVC filter - Goals of care: DNR, DNI, hospice, comfort care - Baseline diagnostics: all initial workup imaging (even normal) 

E.2 Phase 2: Episode Synthesis (Treatment Lines) 

Source: toa/prompts/episodes_from_events.txt | Model: GPT-4.1 

Segment timeline events into EPISODES (treatment-line-based for thoracic): 1. BASELINE: Background predating diagnosis (smoking, COPD, allergies) Anchor: one day before first oncological event 2. DIAGNOSIS: Diagnostic workup -> treatment decision Includes ALL imaging, biopsies, pathology, molecular testing Anchor: specialist visit or first diagnostic procedure 3. TREATMENT LINES: Each line of therapy until change needed Includes systemic therapy, surgery, radiation (as planned) Contains all imaging, labs, symptoms during line CRITICAL: Event that ENDS line (progression, toxicity) stays IN episode Anchor: treatment start date 4. POST-ONCOLOGICAL: Hospice, palliative only, end of active treatment Anchor: transition decision or hospice enrollment OUTPUT (strict JSON, NO event_ids - auto-populated by date range): {"episodes": [ {"episode_id": "temp", "kind": "baseline|diagnosis|treatment_line|post_oncological", "start_date": "YYYY-MM-DD", "end_date": "YYYY-MM-DD", "anchor_event_id": "<event_id from input>", "clinical_context": "Summary of episode", // treatment_line specific: "line_number": 1, "treatment": "carboplatin/pemetrexed/pembrolizumab", "intent": "curative|palliative|adjuvant|neoadjuvant|null", "termination_reason": "progression|toxicity|completion|no_effect|null" }], "notes": ["Segmentation rationale"] }INVARIANTS: Use ONLY dates/event_ids from input. Episodes time-monotonic. Event that ENDS line belongs to THIS episode, not next. 

E.3 Chat System Prompt (Agentic AI Bridge) 

Source: prompts/chat_system.txt | Model: User-selected (GPT-4.1/GPT-5) 38 You are "Vista," board-certified oncology decision-support AI for multidisciplinary tumor boards. DATA SOURCES: 1. CONVERSATION HISTORY - Recent chat context 2. CLINICAL EPISODES (TOA) - High-level narrative phases 3. DETAILED TIMELINE (TOA Events) - Complete chronological log 4. PATIENT DATA - Structured JSONs (patient_info, summary) 5. RECENT EHR DATA - Last 10k chars of raw XML UNDERSTANDING PATIENT: - Form timeline from TOA events (most reliable source) - Cross-reference episodes for treatment phases - Patient may have transferred to Stanford - history in notes - Contradictions exist - base decisions on data support SCOPE: Base answers on provided data + latest guidelines (NCCN, ESMO, IASLC, ASTRO) + peer-reviewed evidence. STYLE: - Concise: bulleted lists over prose - Clinical language: NSCLC, COPD, ECOG, PD-L1 (standard abbreviations) - Direct answer first; brief context if it changes interpretation - Present options with pros/cons without choosing - Cite guidelines when relevant ("NCCN v2.2024") SAFETY: If insufficient data, say so + suggest whatŌĆÖs needed. Output: Plain text with markdown - NO JSON, NO code blocks. 

E.4 Phase 3: Dashboard JSON Generation (UI Population) 

After TOA timeline extraction, dashboard-specific JSONs are generated for the UI. 

E.4.1 Patient Info Extraction 

Source: prompts/patient_info.txt | Model: GPT-4.1 

You are a highest-expert-level oncology data assistant working at Stanford Tumor Board meetings. Tumor board subtype: {TUMOR_TYPE} INPUTS: - XML chunk (final chunk of patient record) - Timeline context (complete timeline from all chunks) PROCESSING: 1. Extract comprehensive demographics, medical history, tumor information 2. Use timeline for chronological progression context 3. Provide complete TNM staging (latest IASLC guidelines) 4. Cross-reference timeline events to validate dates 5. Use medical abbreviations (NSCLC, COPD, ECOG, PD-L1) 6. If name unclear (de-identification): use "John/Jane Doe" 

39 OUTPUT: Valid JSON with EXACT keys (spaces, NOT underscores): PATIENT DEMOGRAPHICS: name, date_of_birth, sex, height_cm, weight_kg previous_conditions # chronic diseases OR major past events # (e.g., "COPD, Stroke (2011)") allergies # list smoking_history # (e.g., "40 pack-years; quit 2015") medications # list of {name, dose, frequency} TUMOR INFORMATION: diagnosis # "CANCER_TYPE. Metastasis (sites). Recurrent." tnm_staging # (e.g., "cT4N2M1b", IASLC 8th edition) histology # (e.g., "Moderately differentiated SCC") driver_mutations # dict: EGFR, ALK, KRAS, PD-L1, ROS1, etc. latest_updates # MAX 3 bullets: (1) recent imaging status, # (2) current clinical situation, (3) TB question body_diagram_image # filename in assets/images TREATMENTS: current # ONLY oncological regimens (no supportive meds) # "Drug1+Drug2+Drug3 (start: YYYY-MM-DD)" previous # Previous ONCOLOGICAL regimens # "Drug1+Drug2 (YYYY-MM-DD to YYYY-MM-DD, response, # reason stopped)" OR "Surgery (YYYY-MM-DD, outcome)" alternatives # list of alternative treatments surgical_candidate # {"eligible": bool, "description": "..."} 

E.4.2 Pre-Tumor-Board Summary Note Generation 

Source: prompts/tumor_board_note.txt | Model: GPT-4.1 This prompt generates the pre-tumor-board summary note ŌĆöa concise clinical summary in the standard Stanford Epic format presented at thoracic tumor board meetings. The note is generated by VISTA Architect at patient ingestion (i.e., before the actual tumor board meeting) and is stored as a graph-resident artifact. The internal prompt-file name ( tumor_board_note.txt ) reflects the production codebase naming and is retained here for source-of-truth fidelity. 

You are writing a Stanford Epic tumor board note. Follow EXACT 4-line format. Include detailed medical information based ONLY on provided patient data. Target 750-999 characters for completeness. FORMAT: AIGen: [LASTNAME]: [AGEGENDER] with h/o [CANCER TYPE including detailed pathology, staging, molecular features] Prior therapy: [DETAILED therapy history with dates, responses, toxicities] Tumor board question: [SPECIFIC clinical question based on current status] Tumor board decision: [DETAILED decisions made including rationale] CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS: 

40 - Use ONLY information from provided patient data, summary, and decisions - DO NOT invent dates, treatments, or clinical details not in data - Extract from PATIENT DEMOGRAPHICS: name, age, sex - Extract from TUMOR INFORMATION: diagnosis, staging, mutations - Extract from TREATMENTS: current and previous (with dates/responses) - Use summaryŌĆÖs cancer_history for prior therapy details - Use tumor board decisions provided (if any) for decision line - If information missing, use general terminology but do not fabricate Generate note following exact 4-line format above. 

Usage in Pipeline: 

1. prepare_patient.py loads patient_info.json and tumor_info.json 

2. Builds context: patient data + tumor board decisions (if any) 3. Calls tumor board note prompt with GPT-4.1 4. Saves to summary.json for UI display 

E.5 Accuracy Evaluation (LLM-as-Judge) Prompt 

Source: quick_eval.py::judge_all_variables | Model: GPT-5 The system prompt below was used verbatim to score each variable evaluation in the primary accuracy assessment. Only the {N_VARS} placeholder (set to 16 as run; DNR/code status is scored by the judge but excluded from the reported 15-variable, 17,700-evaluation primary endpoint) and the literal numbered variable list are interpolated at call time; the rubric text is fixed. 

You are evaluating the quality of {N_VARS} tumor board variables extracted from a clinical pipeline. Compare the extracted values against the EHR ground truth provided. For EACH variable, evaluate: - Correctness: Correct/Incorrect/Partial/N/A - Score: 1-10 (10=correct, 1=wrong, 5=partially correct) - Brief explanation (1-2 sentences) - XML value (ground truth value from XML) === CORE PRINCIPLE: JUDGE TRUTH, NOT FORM === You are scoring whether the answer is factually correct given the EHR, NOT whether it matches a preferred style, length, ordering, or completeness threshold. Concretely: 1. Honest uncertainty is correct. When the EHR genuinely does not document a field, "Unknown" or "Not documented" or "No" (where appropriate per the rules below) is a SCORE 10 answer ŌĆö not a 7. The pipeline is being honest. 2. Default-No is correct when not documented. For binary/safety fields 

41 where the rubric specifies a default of "No" when undocumented (DNR, Metastasis with no findings, Radiation when none given), "No" without further qualification scores 10. 3. Equivalent phrasings score the same. "NKDA" = "No Known Allergies" = "None". "Former smoker, 30py, quit 2010" = "30 pack-year former smoker, quit 2010-04". Range vs single value for ECOG ("1-2" vs "1") both score 10 when both are documented. 4. Verbose != wrong. Rich context alongside the core answer (e.g., "No ŌĆö PET ruled out initial concern") scores the same as the bare answer ("No"). Do not deduct for extra clinically relevant detail. 5. Order in lists does not matter as long as the content is right and the most relevant items are recognizable. 6. Form/style preferences are not deductions. Do not deduct for: bullets vs prose, dates as YYYY-MM-DD vs YYYY-MM, "Yes (sites)" vs "Yes - sites", single-word vs sentence. DEDUCT for: (a) factually wrong values, (b) hallucinations (entities not in the EHR), (c) missed decision-relevant findings actually documented in the EHR, (d) inverted clinical meaning (Full Code reported as DNR, "No" when EHR confirms "Yes", etc.), (e) made-up dates/genes/drugs. === VARIABLE-SPECIFIC SCOPE CLARIFICATIONS === - Metastasis / Lymph Node Involvement: "Suspected" is correct when EHR evidence is suggestive but not definitive; "No" is correct if initial concern was resolved on follow-up imaging. - Previous Surgery ŌĆö SCOPE (Yes/No, oncologic resection for CURRENT diagnosis only): determine from EHR whether the patient underwent an oncologic resection for the current cancer (lobectomy/pneumonectomy for NSCLC, thymectomy for thymoma, etc.). Score 10 when extracted value correctly reflects this; 5ŌĆō6 when wrong direction; 1ŌĆō3 when list contains a fabricated current-cancer surgery. Do NOT deduct for prior-cancer or non-oncologic surgeries appearing in the list (informational, not in scope). - Date of Last CT ŌĆö SCOPE: PET-CT counts as CT. Most recent in-house or outside imaging in chart, whichever is more recent, is acceptable. Month-level (YYYY-MM) acceptable when day uncertain. - Genetic Testing Panel ŌĆö SCOPE: do not penalize molecular results that are clinically correct but not visible in the provided XML chunk (the chunk may be truncated). Only penalize factually wrong or hallucinated results. Be concise but accurate. 

User prompt format: the system prompt above is paired with a user prompt that supplies the numbered variable list (with expected format strings), the extracted-values JSON, and the XML ground-truth chunk (demographics block, surgery dates, and the final 120k-character chunk of the TB-date-truncated record). The model returns a single JSON object with one entry per variable: {correctness, score, explanation, xml_value} .

Decoding settings (see ┬¦4.2 ŌĆ£Decoding and determinismŌĆØ): GPT-5 is invoked with vendor defaults (temperature 1.0; no explicit seed; no reasoning_effort override). All accuracy numbers in this paper are 42 single-run point estimates with Wilson 95% confidence intervals. 

## F MTB Variable Dictionary 

Category Variable Type Source 

Demographics Date of Birth Date Structured Sex Categorical Structured Smoking Status Free text (status + pack-years) Mixed Tumor Diagnosis Free text (type, site, stage) Mixed Histology Free text (subtype, grade) Mixed Metastasis Categorical + sites Mixed Lymph Node Involvement Categorical (Yes/No/Suspected) Mixed Genetic Testing Panel Structured (per-gene results + PD-L1) Mixed Clinical ECOG Performance Status Ordinal (0ŌĆō4) Mixed Therapy Toxicity / Comorbidities Free text Note-derived Treatment Previous Surgery Free text (procedures + dates) Note-derived Current Medical Therapy Free text (regimens + dates) Mixed Radiation Therapy Categorical + details Mixed Imaging Date of Last CT Date Mixed Safety Allergies List Mixed    

> Table S2: 15 MTB-salient variables for thoracic oncology tumor boards, organized by clinical category and typical source type. The variable set intentionally spans structured positive controls, mixed structured/free-text variables, and primarily note-derived variables, allowing the evaluation to test both simple retrieval and longitudinal synthesis. The Source column indicates whether each variable is typically available in OMOP-structured fields ( Structured ), exclusively or primarily in clinical notes ( Note-derived ), or in a combination of both ( Mixed ). Date of Birth and Sex are reliably structured and serve as positive controls for hallucination in our generative pipeline. Previous Surgery is deliberately scored as note-derived because clinically relevant surgical history (including remote non-oncologic procedures relevant to anesthesia or current surgical planning) typically appears only in free-text past medical history rather than in structured procedure tables.

F.1 Worked example I: Synthetic perfect-credit case (SYNTH-01) 

Synthetic illustrative case; not a real patient. The distinctive variable combination (EGFR exon 19 deletion + MET amplification, Stage IV mucinous adenocarcinoma, on line 3 amivantamab + lazertinib) was verified absent from the 1,180-patient evaluation cohort prior to inclusion in this table. 

F.2 Worked example II: Synthetic failure-mode case (SYNTH-02) 

Synthetic illustrative case; not a real patient. Used to demonstrate the most common error category in the ┬¦2.3 error analysis ŌĆö Date-of-Last-CT internal/external imaging ambiguity ŌĆö and the judgeŌĆÖs ability to detect and explain it. 

## G RAG Baseline Comparison 

To empirically validate the architectural contribution of VISTA ArchitectŌĆÖs graph-based pre-computation, we implemented a standard BM25 retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) baseline and evaluated it under 43 Variable Extracted Ground Truth (XML) Match Score 

Date of Birth 1957-04-12 1957-04-12 Ō£ō 10 Sex Female Female Ō£ō 10 Smoking Status Never smoker; secondhand exposure noted Never smoker; passive smoke exposure docu-mented 

Ō£ō 10 Diagnosis NSCLC, RUL, Stage IV (cT3N2M1b, hepatic mets) NSCLC RUL, Stage IV, M1b liver 

Ō£ō 10 Histology Mucinous adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated (TTF1+, CK7+) Mucinous adenoca, poorly differentiated, TTF1+/CK7+ 

Ō£ō 10 Metastasis Yes ŌĆö liver, bilateral adrenals Yes (liver, adrenals) Ō£ō 10 Lymph Node Involve-ment Yes (mediastinal, hilar) Yes Ō£ō 10 Genetic Testing Panel EGFR exon 19 del posi-tive; MET amplification (FISH 8.2); PD-L1 TPS 5%; KRAS/ALK/ROS1/BRAF/RET/NTRK/HER2 negative EGFR ex19del+, MET amp+ (FISH 8.2), PD-L1 5%, others negative 

Ō£ō 10 ECOG Performance Status 1 1 Ō£ō 10 Therapy Toxicity / Co-morbidities Grade 2 paronychia (line 1 osimertinib); Type 2 diabetes; HTN Paronychia G2 on osi; DM2; HTN 

Ō£ō 10 Previous Surgery No (no oncologic resection for current diagnosis) No oncologic resection docu-mented 

Ō£ō 10 Current Medical Ther-apy Amivantamab + Lazertinib (started 2025-09-08) Amivantamab + Lazertinib, start 09/2025 

Ō£ō 10 Radiation Therapy Yes ŌĆö palliative RT to L4 ver-tebral body, 20 Gy in 5 frac-tions (2025-07) Palliative XRT 20 Gy / 5 fx, L4, July 2025 

Ō£ō 10 Date of Last CT 2025-11-04 2025-11-04 (CT chest/abd/pelvis) 

Ō£ō 10 Allergies Penicillin (rash) PCN (rash) Ō£ō 10 

Overall Mean score 10.00 

Table S3: Synthetic illustrative case (SYNTH-01); not a real patient. Perfect-credit extraction across all 15 MTB variables. Combination of driver biology (EGFR ex19del + MET amplification), histology, stage, and line 3 amivantamab + lazertinib regimen was verified absent from the 1,180-patient cohort to ensure no real patient is identifiable. 

identical conditions: same patients, same variable set (16 MTB variables in the original experiment; 15 in the reported primary endpoint after excluding DNR/code status), same LLM-as-judge, and same TB-date-truncated ground-truth XML. 

G.1 RAG Baseline Methods 

Cohort. 30 patients from the clinician-validation subset, randomly selected from the full 1,180-patient cohort and subsequently checked for representativeness across diagnosis category and overall extraction-quality distribution. The subset was not used for development of either VISTA Architect or the RAG baseline. 44 Variable Extracted Ground Truth (XML) Match Score Judge rationale (excerpt) 

Date of Birth 1948-09-22 1948-09-22 Ō£ō 10 DOB matches exactly. Sex Male Male Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöSmoking Status Former smoker, 45 pack-years, quit 2014 Former smoker, 45 py, quit 2014 

Ō£ō 10 Equivalent phrasing. Diagnosis NSCLC, LUL, Stage IIIA NSCLC LUL Stage IIIA (cT2bN2M0) 

Ō£ō 10 Cancer type, site, stage all correct. Histology Squamous cell carci-noma Squamous cell carci-noma, moderately dif-ferentiated 

Ō£ō 9 Differentiation grade omit-ted; minor incompleteness. Metastasis No No (mediastinal only) Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöLymph Node In-volvement Yes (mediastinal N2) Yes (mediastinal) Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöGenetic Testing Panel PD-L1 TPS 40%; EGFR/ALK/KRAS negative PD-L1 40%, EGFR/ALK/KRAS negative 

Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöECOG Performance Status 1 1 Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöTherapy Toxicity / Comorbidities COPD; HTN COPD (GOLD 2); HTN; hypothy-roidism Partial 7 Misses hypothyroidism documented in problem list. Previous Surgery No oncologic resec-tion No resection (VATS biopsy 2024-03 for di-agnosis only) 

Ō£ō 10 Biopsy correctly excluded from oncologic resection per scope. Current Medical Therapy Carboplatin + Pacli-taxel + concurrent RT 60 Gy Carboplatin/Paclitaxel + concurrent 60 Gy XRT, start 2025-09 

Ō£ō 10 ŌĆöRadiation Therapy Yes ŌĆö concurrent tho-racic RT Yes ŌĆö thoracic RT 60 Gy / 30 fx 

Ō£ō 9 Site and dose-fractionation underspecified. 

Date of Last CT 2025-08-14 2025-11-02 ├Ś 5 Extracted the most recent in-house CT chest (2025-08-14) but missed a more recent outside-hospital CT chest/abdomen/pelvis dated 2025-11-02 in a Care Every-where upload. Both events present in XML. 

Allergies NKDA No known drug aller-gies 

Ō£ō 10 Equivalent. 

Overall Mean score 9.33 1 Incorrect, 1 Partial, 13 Cor-rect. 

Table S4: Synthetic illustrative case (SYNTH-02); not a real patient. Illustrates the most common VISTA Architect error category from ┬¦2.3 error analysis (Date-of-Last-CT internal/external imaging ambiguity), together with the judgeŌĆÖs stated rationale catching the error. The judge correctly flags the missed outside-hospital CT as Incorrect (score 5) and notes the documentation location (Care Everywhere upload). 

Retrieval. BM25Okapi over raw EHR XML entry-level chunks (one chunk per <entry> element). For each variable query, the top-20 chunks by BM25 score were packed into a 4,096-token context window. No cleaning, filtering, or domain-specific preprocessing was applied beyond whitespace tokenization and lowercasing. 

Query strategy. Each of the 16 MTB variables (including DNR/code status, which is excluded from the 45 reported primary endpoint) was mapped to a focused, plain-English natural-language question with a format hint specifying the expected output shape. This per-variable query design is the configuration most 

favorable to BM25 retrieval; bundling all variables into a single prompt would dilute retrieval quality. 

Answer generation. A minimal prompt (no chain-of-thought, no role-play beyond ŌĆ£clinical assistantŌĆØ) was used with two models: GPT-4.1 (the same model used for VISTAŌĆÖs chunk-level event extraction) and GPT-5 (the same model used for VISTAŌĆÖs patient-info generation). 

Context isolation. The RAG baseline received only TB-date-truncated EHR XML. No TOA timeline, episodes, patient_info snapshots, deterministic-retrieval hints, or graph-store fallbacks were providedŌĆö any of these would inflate RAG scores unfairly. 

Evaluation. The same GPT-5 LLM-as-judge with identical rubric and per-variable guidance was used for both VISTA and RAG evaluations. 

G.2 Per-Variable Results                                                     

> Variable VISTA RAG (GPT-4.1) RAG (GPT-5)
> Date of Birth 10.00 (100.0%) 6.10 (56.7%) 6.50 (60.0%) Sex 10.00 (100.0%) 9.10 (90.0%) 9.13 (90.0%) Smoking Status 9.87 (100.0%) 9.57 (96.7%) 9.40 (90.0%) Diagnosis 9.80 (100.0%) 7.50 (66.7%) 7.33 (60.0%) Histology 9.67 (93.3%) 8.87 (83.3%) 9.10 (83.3%) Metastasis 9.73 (96.7%) 6.67 (50.0%) 6.80 (53.3%) Lymph Node Involvement 9.70 (96.7%) 9.33 (90.0%) 9.67 (96.7%) Genetic Testing Panel 9.70 (93.3%) 7.47 (60.0%) 7.30 (56.7%) ECOG Performance Status 9.67 (96.7%) 7.13 (63.3%) 7.50 (73.3%) Therapy Toxicity / Comorbidities 9.63 (96.7%) 5.07 (30.0%) 8.33 (63.3%) Previous Surgery 9.63 (96.7%) 5.00 (36.7%) 4.93 (36.7%) Current Medical Therapy 9.53 (93.3%) 8.30 (70.0%) 8.70 (86.7%) Radiation Therapy 10.00 (100.0%) 8.47 (73.3%) 6.87 (33.3%) Date of Last CT 9.77 (96.7%) 7.17 (66.7%) 6.93 (63.3%) Allergies 9.67 (93.3%) 8.00 (66.7%) 7.43 (56.7%)
> Overall 9.76 (96.9%) 7.58 (66.7%) 7.73 (66.9%)
> Table S5: Per-variable comparison: VISTA Architect vs. BM25 RAG baseline after excluding DNR/code status from the primary endpoint (N=30 patients, 450 evaluations per system). Mean score (0ŌĆō10) with % correct in parentheses.

G.3 Qualitative Timeline Comparison 

To illustrate the structural difference between approaches, we asked the RAG system to reconstruct a chronological clinical timeline for three patients spanning VISTA-score strata. The RAG system surfaced 10ŌĆō18 lexically prominent events per patient, while VISTAŌĆÖs deduplicated TOA timeline contained 50ŌĆō237 structured events with precise dates, modalities, anatomical sites, and provenance linksŌĆöan order-of-magnitude difference in coverage reflecting the fundamental limitation of per-query retrieval versus pre-computed graph construction. 46 G.4 Limitations of the RAG Comparison 

This comparison evaluates BM25 (sparse lexical) retrieval only; dense-embedding retrieval might recover some accuracy on semantically phrased queries but would not address the temporal disconnection that drives the largest error categories (Previous Surgery, Metastasis, Radiation Therapy). We note that a ŌĆ£full-record dumpŌĆØ approachŌĆöproviding the entire patient record to a long-context model in a single callŌĆöis not a viable alternative for this cohort: many patient records exceed even current million-token context windows, and the per-query cost of repeatedly processing entire records would be prohibitive in a clinical setting where the same patient data is queried many times across multiple interactions. The pre-computation design of VISTA Architect specifically addresses this by structuring the record once and serving all downstream queries from the resulting graph. 

G.5 RAG Baseline Prompts 

Source: rag_baseline_queries.py | Models: GPT-4.1 and GPT-5 (results reported separately in Table S5). 

Per-variable retrieval queries. A single focused natural-language question is issued per variable, paired with a short format_hint that constrains output shape (but never the answer). The queries below were used verbatim; format hints are shown in italics. 

Date of Birth What is the patientŌĆÖs date of birth? (Answer YYYY-MM-DD or "Unknown".) Sex What is the patientŌĆÖs sex? (Single word: Male, Female, or Unknown.) Smoking Status What is the patientŌĆÖs smoking history? Include pack-years and current/former/never status. (One short sentence, or "Unknown".) Diagnosis What is the patientŌĆÖs cancer diagnosis? Include cancer type, primary site, and stage if documented. (One short phrase, or "Unknown".) Histology What is the histologic subtype (e.g., adenocarcinoma, squamous cell, small cell, carcinoid)? (One short phrase, or "Unknown".) Metastasis Does the patient have metastatic disease? Where? (Begin with "Yes", "No", or "Suspected", optionally followed by sites.) Lymph Node Does the patient have lymph node involvement from Involvement the cancer? (One word: Yes, No, or Suspected.) Genetic Testing What molecular and genetic testing has been done? Panel List each gene tested (EGFR, KRAS, ALK, ROS1, BRAF, MET, RET, NTRK, HER2) and its result, plus PD-L1 if reported. (Semicolon-separated list like "EGFR: L858R positive; KRAS: negative; PD-L1: 60%", or "Not tested".) ECOG Performance What is the patientŌĆÖs most recent ECOG performance Status status? (Single digit, range, or "Unknown".) Therapy Toxicity / What significant cancer treatment toxicities or Comorbidities major comorbidities does the patient have? 

47 (One short phrase, or "None documented".) Previous Surgery Has the patient had previous oncological surgery for their current cancer (lobectomy, wedge, pneumonectomy, VATS resection)? If yes, what procedure and when? (One short sentence naming the procedure, or "No".) Current Medical What systemic cancer therapy (chemo, immunotherapy, Therapy targeted) is the patient currently receiving? (One short phrase with drug(s) and start date, or "None".) Radiation Therapy Has the patient received radiation therapy? If yes, site, dose, and dates? (Begin with "Yes" or "No"; if yes briefly include site, dose, dates.) Date of Last CT What is the date of the patientŌĆÖs most recent CT scan (chest, abdomen/pelvis, or PET-CT)? (YYYY-MM-DD or "Unknown".) Allergies What drug allergies does the patient have? (Comma-separated list, or "NKDA".) DNR Does the patient have a DNR (Do Not Resuscitate) order documented? (One word: Yes or No.) 

Generation prompt. For every per-variable query, BM25Okapi retrieves the top-20 entry-level XML chunks (4,096-token context window), then GPT-4.1 or GPT-5 is called with the system / user prompts shown below. No chain-of-thought scaffolding, no role-play, no retrieval hints beyond the format string. 

SYSTEM: You are a clinical assistant. Answer the userŌĆÖs question using ONLY the provided excerpts from the patientŌĆÖs medical record. If the information is not present in the excerpts, answer "Unknown". Be concise. USER: Excerpts from patientŌĆÖs medical record: ---{retrieved BM25 chunks, 4096 tokens} ---Question: {variable-specific query} {variable-specific format_hint} Answer: 

The retrieved context contains only TB-date-truncated raw EHR XML (no TOA timeline, no episodes, no patient-info snapshots, no deterministic-retrieval hints, no graph-store fallbacks). The judge prompt and rubric used to score RAG outputs are identical to those used to score VISTA Architect (Appendix E.5). 

## H Agentic Implementation Details 

This appendix documents the specific agentic implementation evaluated in Sections 2.3 and 2.5. It is one instantiation of the architectural pattern described in Section 2.1.4, not a locked-in canonical form. 48 H.1 Build pipeline stages 

The build pipeline for a single patient runs as seven sequential stages, with parallelism inside individual stages where applicable. Stages 1, 2, 4, 6, and 7 are essential to the architectural pattern (serialize ŌåÆ chunk 

ŌåÆ unify ŌåÆ synthesize ŌåÆ display); stages 3 and 5 are concrete realizations of the parallel-sub-agents and safety-net patterns. 1. Setup. Copy the patientŌĆÖs MEDS graphml into a per-run working directory and extract structured demographics from the MEDS XML. 2. Chunk planning. Serialize the MEDS Graph to text in temporal order and partition into encounter-aligned chunks ( Ōł╝120k characters per chunk by default). 3. Parallel chunk extraction. For each chunk, invoke an LLM sub-agent that returns structured TOA event records together with source_event_refs for provenance. Sub-agents run concurrently. 4. Unifier. Deduplicate events across chunks using union-find over shared source_event_refs ; merge background facts; resolve ambiguous cross-chunk merges via an LLM-mediated sub-agent for the residual cases. 5. Radiology alignment safety net. Cross-check the TOA timeline against deterministically retrievable imaging dates from the OMOP structured fields; for candidate dates not represented in the timeline within ┬▒3 days, invoke a per-date verifier sub-agent to confirm whether a real imaging study occurred. Confirmed events are appended to the timeline. 6. Episode synthesis. A single LLM call segments the unified timeline into baseline, diagnosis, treatment-line, and post-oncological episodes (Section 2.1.3, Appendix D). 7. Display generation. A single holistic LLM call produces all patient-info fields and the pre-tumor-board summary note (Appendix E.4.1, Appendix E.4.2). After stage 7 the patient is dashboard-ready. Optional evaluation stages (LLM-as-judge scoring against ground truth) are run separately during development and are not part of the production build path. 

H.2 Deterministic retrieval tool surface 

The agentic interface depends on a deterministic retrieval layer that exposes graph-resident facts as callable tools. Tools used by the build pipeline include imaging-date vectors, modality-keyed imaging listings, code-status mention searches, smoking/ECOG status retrievers, driver-mutation and molecular-panel keyword search with word-boundary handling, treatment-history retrievers, and patient-state retrievers (allergies, conditions, drug exposures). Each tool returns provenance-tracked results sourced from the MEDS Graph. The presence of this deterministic layer between the LLM and the graphŌĆörather than letting the LLM perform retrieval directly over raw textŌĆöis the architectural feature that enables reliable agentic operation. 

H.3 Models and orchestration in the evaluated implementation 

The agentic pipeline evaluated in Section 2.5 was implemented by connecting an agentic-compatible version of the build pipeline to StanfordŌĆÖs PHI-compliant Google Vertex AI deployment of Claude Code (Claude Opus 4.6), running entirely inside the institutional data perimeter. Claude Code acts as the top-level orchestrating agent: it reads the MEDS Graph and TOA layers directly through deterministic 49 graph queries, invokes specialized LLM tools for each per-stage sub-task, and validates the resulting sub-agent outputs against the graph before merging them back into the patient-level artifacts. In the evaluated configuration, per-chunk event extraction and episode synthesis are invoked as sub-agent tool calls served by Gemini 3.5 Flash (the parallel-friendly model choice for the per-chunk workload), and the holistic display-generation step is run by Claude Opus 4.6 itself as the orchestrator carries the full TOA layer in its own working context. The radiology alignment per-date verifier used Claude Opus 4.6 as well. These specific per-stage model assignments are empirical and replaceable; the agentic contract is model-agnostic by construction, so the same architecture runs against any tool-call-compatible LLM that can be served inside a PHI-compliant perimeter. In the production configuration used to measure cohort wall time, the test30 cohort was processed with all 30 patients running fully in parallel. 

H.4 What this implementation deliberately does not cover 

Several extensions are natural under the same architectural pattern but were not implemented in the evaluated version: an in-process agent loop using the Model Context Protocol or equivalent (the present version uses per-stage CLI scripts under a shell orchestrator); multi-source ingestion beyond the OMOP-derived MEDS XML path; a unified cross-patient agent surface (cross-patient retrieval is currently a separate agent invocation); persistent multi-turn chat-session state (each chat turn is a fresh agent invocation reading the persistent graph); and judge-feedback-driven self-correction loops. These are documented as future work, not as departures from the architecture. 50