Title: 14756003

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
1

# Correcting spatial transcriptomics data affected by a prevalent 

# transcript leakage problem across platforms, species, and 

# tissues 

Christina Huan Shi 1,* , Yibo Zhai 2,* , Savio Ho -Chit Chow 1, Liangbang Li 2, Chase M. Carver 3, Marcos 

G. Teneche 4, Jesus Flores 5, Colin Kern 5, Peter D. Adams 4, 6, Bing Ren 7, Marissa J. Schafer 3, Quan 

Zhu 5, Yingying Wei 2,$ and Kevin Y. Yip 1,4,8,$ 

1 Center for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery 

Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States 

2 Department of Statistics and Data Science , The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong 

Kong 

3 Robert and Arlene Kogod Center on Aging, Department of Physiology and Biomedical 

Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States 

4 Cancer Genome and Epigenetics Program, NCI -Designated Cancer Center, Sanford Burnham 

Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States 

5 Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 

CA, United States 

6 Center for Metabolic and Liver Diseases, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, 

La Jolla, CA, United States 

7 New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United States 

8 Center for Neurologic Diseases, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, 

CA, United States 

* Equal contributions 

$ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Emails: YW: ywei@cuhk.edu.hk; KYY: 

kyip@sbpdiscovery.org 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

Abstract 

Spatial transcriptomics has been widely applied to study the spatial distri bution of cell types, cell states, 

and specific gene expression in tissue samples . However, we show that there is a prevalent transcript 

leakage problem in spatial transcriptomics data, where transcripts expressed by a cell diffuse to its 

neighborhood and are recurrently detected in the nearby cells. By analyzing published data sets , we 

show that this problem is general across data produced from different tissues and different species 

using different imaging -based and sequencing -based spatial transcriptomics platforms. It affects both 

upstream tasks such as expression quantification as well as downstream tasks such as cell -type 

annotation and detection of spatially -dependent gene expression. To tackle the transcript leakage 

problem, we propose a reference -free Bayesian model -based method, DeLeakage, which cleans up 

the data much more effectively than existing denoising methods. DeLeakage also improves cell -type 

annotation and avoids false detection of spatially dependent expression. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Introduction 

Spatial transcript omic s (ST) technologies are rapidly advancing our understanding of the organization 

of complex tissues in both healthy and diseased states 1-6. However, in several recent benchmarking 

studies, transcripts were detected in cell types that they are not expected to be express ed 7-10 . Here we 

show that a major contributor to transcript detection in unexpected cell types is the leaking of transcripts 

to surrounding cells during the experimental process. Unfortunately , existing deconvolution methods 

developed for bulk genomic data 11 -19 or ST data 20 -23 cannot tackle the transcript leakage problem 

because these methods assume that the observed transcriptome profile of a cell/spot/sample is the 

result of mixing different cells/cell types at certain proportions, and all genes follow the same 

proportions (Figure 3B) . In contrast, as we show below, different genes hav e very different leakage 

properties (Figure 3A) . Therefore, a computational method for effectively adjusting ST data affected by 

transcript leakage is still lacking. 

By analyzing a variety of ST data produced from various tissues and species using different imaging -

based and sequencing -based ST platforms , we show that transcript leakage is prevalent and various 

standard analyses are affected. To tackle the problem, we propose a reference -free Bayesian 

hierarchical model -based method , DeLeakage, to adjust gene expression levels affected by transcripts 

leaked from neighboring cells through a diffusion process. Our model contains different diffusion 

parameters for different genes . On the theoretical side of this study , we prove that our model is 

identifiable , which ensures endogenous expression can be distinguished from the effects of transcript 

leakage and the model parameters can be estimated reliably. In contrast, classic reference -free 

deconvolution methods usually build upon non -negative matrix factorization, which is known to be non -

identifiable 24 , while reference -based deconvolution methods can be inaccurate when the reference 

does not provide matched cell types or contain strong batch effects. On the practical side of this study ,

we show that DeLeakage substantially outperforms existing ST denoising methods on both simulated 

and real ST data .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Results 

Evidence of transcript leakage in spatial transcriptomics data 

To study why some transcripts are detected in unexpected cell types, we analyzed a published ST data 

set of the mouse brain 25 produced using multiplexed error -robust fluorescence in situ hybridization 

(MERFISH) 26 . We found that transcripts of Slc 17 a7, which should be primarily expressed as a marker 

of excitatory, glutamatergic neurons and rarely expressed in non -neurons 27 , were frequently detected 

in non -neuronal cells (74%; Figure 1A) . The spatial distribution of them closely resembles the 

distribution of excitatory neurons (Figure 1B), suggesting potential leakage of Slc 17 a7 transcripts from 

excitatory neurons to nearby cells. Consequently , in the hippocampal region , which has a high density 

of excitatory neurons (Figure 1B ), n on -neurons with a high detected level of Slc17a7 form “contour 

lines” right next to the principal cells (Figure 1 B, inner rectangle) , which clearly illustrates the potential 

transcript leakage .

Beyond Slc 17 a7, transcripts of various other cell type markers are also commonly detected in 

unexpected cell types (Figure 1C). This more likely represents a technical problem than a biological 

phenomenon because in dissociative single -cell RNA sequencing (scRNA -seq) data from the same 

study, cell -specific marker transcripts are much more exclusively detected in the expected cell types 

(Figure 1D). The unexpected transcript detection is not due to incorrect clustering of cells of different 

cell types or incorrect cell -type annotation s, because expected and unexpected markers are also co -

detected in individual cells (Figure 1E). Based on this observation, we compiled a list of gene pairs 

expected to have mutually exclusive expression in a cell (Methods) and found that transcripts of these 

gene pairs are detected in the same cell much more frequently in the MERFISH da ta than in the scRNA -

seq data in all brain regions (Figure 1F, Supplementary Figure 1). 

Next, w e found that in the MERFISH data, transcripts of potential contamination genes are significantly 

further away from the cell center than endogenous ly expressed genes (Methods , Figure 1G), which 

supports our hypothesis that the former transcripts are from an exogenous source . As another 

important support for our transcript leakage hypothesis, the level of unexpected transcripts in a cell is 

higher when it is closer to a cell that endogenously expresses it , which acts as the potential 

contamination source (Figure 1H). This observation also shows that the unexpected transcripts are 

less likely explainable by contamination from cells at the same 2 -dimensional location but residing in 

other imaging layers (the “z -planes”). We further found that the detected transcript levels of the 

unexpected genes are much higher than the detected levels of transcripts binding the negative control 

“blank ” probes (Figure 1I), indicating that the unexpected transcript detection cannot be explained by 

false positive signals or off -target probe binding. 

Finally, t o test whether the unexpected transcripts are due to cell segmentation errors , we used three 

other approaches to perform cell segmentation (Methods ). In all three cases, transcripts of cell type 

markers are still observed in unexpected cell types (Figure 1J -L), showing that this issue cannot be 

fully explained by incorrect cell segmentation. 

Together, these results support that transcript leakage is the most plausible explanation for the 

detection of the unexpected transcripts as compared to the alternative explanations discussed. 

Next, we investigated the effects of transcript leakage on the detection of genes with spatially -

dependent expression patterns. In an area that consists of multiple regions within the parietal and 

temporal lobes, including hypothalamus, thalamus, cerebral cortex, and hippocampal formation regions 

(Figure 1M ), the spatial locations of Astro -Epen cells follow a very specific pattern (Figure 1N ). We 

identified genes that show significantly different levels in Astro -Epen cells at different spatial locations. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

These genes include ma rkers of some other cell types, including the excitatory neurons marker Slc17a7 ,

inhibitory , GABAergic neurons marker Slc32a1 , and OPC -Oligo marker Mog . The Astro -Epen cells with 

high detected levels of these genes strongly co -localize with cells from these other cell types (Figure 

1O), in a way highly independent of the intrinsic spatial distribution of Astro -Epen cells (Figure 1N), 

indicating that the spatially -dependent levels of these transcripts are more likely caused by transcript 

leakage than genuine biology .

In the same way, we analyzed several additional ST data sets, including 1) MERFISH data produced 

from the human heart 28 , 2) Xenium data produced from the mouse brain, and 3) Pixel -seq data 

produced from the mouse brain 29 . In all three cases, we found the same evidence of transcript leakage ,

with a Jaccard Index of co -detection of mutually exclusive gene pairs from 0.195 to 0.353 (Figure 2, 

Supplementary Results), showing that it is a prevalent problem in ST data. 

DeLeakage: A statistical method for correcting for transcript leakage 

To tackle the transcript leakage problem, we propose a reference -free Bayesian hierarchical model -

based method, DeLeakage (De contamination for Transcript Leakage ), which decomposes the 

observed transcript counts of each cell into its endogenous expression and transcripts leaked from 

other cells through a diffusion process (Figure 3A ). Our model includes a different diffusion parameter 

for each gene, thus allowing the capture of gene -specific properties that affect leakage patterns. This 

is different from the conventional deconvolution approach es , which model the observed expression 

profile of a sample as the result of mixing different cell types without considering gene -specific 

parameters (Figure 3B). 

DeLeakage works as follows ( Figure 3C , Methods ). Suppose that after cell segmentation, we obtain a 

total of  𝑁  cells and cell  𝑖  has a volume of  𝑉 𝑖 . Denote the number of transcripts of gene  𝑔  assigned to 

cell  𝑖  as  𝑌 𝑔𝑖  . Based on the spatial location of each cell  𝑖  , the subset of other cells in its spatial 

neighborhood is denoted as  𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ). The distance between cell  𝑗  and cell  𝑖  is denoted as  𝑑 𝑖𝑗 . Assume 

there are  𝐾  cell types in total and the probability for cell  𝑖  to belong to cell type  𝑘  is  𝑃𝑟 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 ) = 𝜋 𝑘 ,

where  𝑍 𝑖  is the latent cell -type label for cell  𝑖 , and any two cells’ cell -type labels are independent . For 

cell  𝑖 , given its cell -type label  𝑍 𝑖  and the cell -type labels of its neighbors,  𝑍 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ), we assume that  𝑌 𝑔𝑖 

follows a Gaussian distribution  𝑁 (𝜂 𝑔𝑖 , 𝜎 𝑔 

> 2

) with a mean  𝜂 𝑔𝑖  and a gene -specific variance  𝜎 𝑔 

> 2

. The mean 

level can be further decomposed into  𝜂 𝑔𝑖 = 𝛿 𝑖 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 )𝐾  

> 𝑘 =1

+

𝛾 𝑔 ∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 = 𝑙 )𝐾  

> 𝑙 =1𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

, where  𝜇 𝑔𝑘  is the mean expression level of gene  𝑔  in cell 

type  𝑘 , 𝛾 𝑔 ∈ (0,1) is a gene -specific contamination parameter,  𝛽 > 0 is a parameter that specifies the 

decay of contamination with respect to distance, and  𝛿 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖  

> 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 𝑗 =1
> 𝑁 𝑉 𝑗

accounts for the impact of cell 

volume, namely larger cells are likely to leak more transcripts to neighboring cells. Consequently, 

𝛿 𝑖 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 )𝐾  

> 𝑘 =1

represents cell  𝑖 ’s endogenous expression level of gene  𝑔  after accounting for its 

cell volume , whereas for a neighboring cell  𝑗 ∈ 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) that belongs to cell type  𝑘 ̃ , its contribution to cell 

𝑖 ’s detected transcript level of gene  𝑔  due to transcript leakage is  𝛾 𝑔 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 = 𝑙 )𝐾  

> 𝑙 =1

=

𝛾 𝑔 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 𝜇 𝑔 𝑘 ̃ , which depends on its cell type  𝑘 ̃ , cell volume factor  𝛿 𝑗 , distance  𝑑 𝑖𝑗  to cell  𝑖 , and 

gene  𝑔 ’s contamination parameter  𝛾 𝑔  .

Theorem 1 below states that DeLeakage 's model is identifiable up to label switching of cell types, 

thanks to (a) the cellular resolution and (b) spatial structure of ST data under conditions that are very 

easily met in reality. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Theorem 1. Given that 

(C1) For each cell type  𝑘 , there exists a gene  𝑔 (𝑘 ) such that  𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 > 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑙  for all  𝑙 ≠ 𝑘 ; and 

(C2) There exist three cells  𝑖 1, 𝑖 2, 𝑖 3 such that the function  ℎ(𝑥 ) = ℎ𝑖 2(𝑥 )−ℎ𝑖 1(𝑥 ) 

> ℎ𝑖 3(𝑥 )−ℎ𝑖 1(𝑥 )

is strictly monotonic in  𝑥 ,

where  ℎ𝑖 (𝑥 ) = ∑ δ𝑗 

> δ𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝑑 𝑖𝑗 𝑥 )𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) represents the spatial density of neighbors for cell  𝑖 , which 

is normalized by each neighbor’s cell volume and weighted by each neighbor’s distance to cell 

𝑖  with  𝑥  denoting the scale parameter of the exponential kernel for weighting, 

then the DeLeakage model is identifiable (up to label switching) in the sense that if  𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 ) = 𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 ∗)

for any  𝒀  for two sets of parameters  𝜣 = {𝝅 , (𝝁 1, … , 𝝁 𝐾 ), 𝜸 , 𝛽 , 𝜮 } and  𝜣 ∗ = {𝝅 ∗, (𝝁 1 

> ∗

, … , 𝝁 𝐾 ∗ 

> ∗

), 𝜸 ∗, 𝛽 ∗, 𝜮 ∗},

then  𝐾 = 𝐾 ∗,𝜋 𝑘 = 𝜋 ρ(𝑘 ) 

> ∗

, 𝝁 𝑘 = 𝝁 ρ(𝑘 ) 

> ∗

, 𝜸 = 𝜸 ∗, 𝛽 = 𝛽 ∗, and  𝜮 = 𝜮 ∗, where  𝜌  is a permutation of {1, … , 𝐾 }.

Condition (C1) requires each cell type to have at least one marker gene that is expressed at a higher 

level in that cell type than in any other cell type, which is always true in practice. In fact, researchers 

very often deliberately include marker into the gene panel for imaging -based ST. Condition (C2) is an 

easily met condition on spatial heterogeneity. 

Based on the estimated parameters  𝛾 ̂𝑔  and  𝛽 ̂ , and  𝜇 𝑔𝑘  and the inferred cell type labels  𝑍 ̂𝑗 , we compute 

corrected transcript level for gene  𝑔  in cell  𝑖  as  𝑌 ̃𝑔𝑖 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 − 𝛾 ̂g ∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ̂ 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 𝜇 ̂𝑔 𝑍 ̂𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) in the same 

spirit as the batch effect adjustment done in previous studies 30, 31 .

We implemented a CPU version and a GPU version of our Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCM C)

algorithm , both conducting parallel computing by partitioning cells into layers so that cells of the same 

layer are not within each other's Markov blanket and hence their cell -type labels can be updated in 

parallel to speed up the calculations (Figure 3C ; Methods ).

Validation and benchmarking of DeLeakage using simulated data 

To test DeLeakage , we first produced a simulated data set that mimics real ST data ( Figure 4A -B, 

Methods). When we applied DeLeakage to the data, it successfully identif ied the real cell types (Figure 

4C), estimate d the real mean expression level of each gene in each cell type (Figure 4D), and estimate d

the gene -specific diffusion parameters accurately (Figure 4E). 

In the data , marker gene of cell type 1 have much higher actual expression levels in these cells (Figure 

4F upper ) than in other cells (Figure 4F lower) , but due to transcript leakage, in the observed data ,

some cells not of cell type 1 but residing in its spatial territory also have high detected levels of the cell 

type marker (Figure 4G) . After applying DeLeakage, the contamination was successfully remove d while 

retaining true expression level s of the cell type marker (Figure 4H) . These findings were also obtained 

from the other cell types (Supplementary Figures 3 -4). 

Although no previous methods were specifically designed to tackle transcript leakage , we test ed 

whether the effects of transcript leakage can also be removed using a general ST data denoising 

method . Therefore, we applied SPLIT 23 and SpotClean 20 to our simulated data (Methods) . SPLIT first 

runs RCTD 21 with reference scRNA -seq data to deconvolute the observed expression levels and 

estimate the proportions of the primary and the secondary cell types. Subsequently, SPLIT scales the 

observed expression to a purified expression level with the scaling factor being the primary cell type’s 

expected fraction of transcripts. SpotClean is a method that leverages background spots that are 

supposed to have no expression to remove contamination due to messenger RNAs bleed for spot -

based ST methods. When we appl ied these methods to our simulated data , SPLIT failed to remove 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

most contamination (Figure 4I) , while SpotClean inferred expression levels much lower than the real 

levels (Figure 4J). These findings were also obtained from the other cell types (Supplementary Figure s

3-4). When we computed the residuals between the inferred and actual gene expression levels of the 

marker genes (Figure 4K-O) , i n all five cell types DeLeakage had a residual close to 0 for most genes ,

confirming the identifiability of our model and the accurate estimat ion of model parameters by our 

algorithm . In comparison , in each cell type , SPLIT led to some cells having a large positive or negative 

residual , while SpotClean over -corrected the data and consistently produced negative residual s.

We also found that DeLeak age was more effective than SPLIT and SpotClean in recovering actual 

differences between different cell types (Figure 4P -S) and avoiding false positives when calling 

differentially expressed genes between cell clusters (Figure 4U -V) (Supplementary Results) .

Together, these results validate DeLeakage’s model and algorithm and also confirm the necessity for 

a new method specifically designed for tackling the transcript leakage problem. 

Effective correction of real spatial transcriptomics data using DeLeakage 

Next, we applied DeLeakage to the real ST data sets. In the scRNA -seq data of mouse brain , each cell 

type contains marker genes that are almost exclusively expressed in this cell type (Figure 5A). In 

contrast, in the original uncorrected MERFISH data, transcripts of various cell type markers are 

commonly detected in other cell types (Figure 5B). After applying DeLeakage, these cell type markers 

became more specifically detected in the expected cell types (Figure 5C). In comparison, after applying 

SPLIT, non -specific detection of cell type markers was still quite prevalent (Figure 5D). For example, 

among cells other than excitatory neurons, Slc17a7 was detected in 5 5% of them in the raw MERFISH 

data, 2 1% after applying DeLeakage, and 5 5% after applying SPLIT. 

As illustrative visual examples , in the raw MERFISH data, the excitatory neuron marker Slc17a7 wa s

detected in regions with a low density of excitatory neurons (Figure 5E,F) . After applying DeLe akage, 

Slc17a7 expression was detected primarily in excitatory neurons (Figure 5G). Of note, DeLeakage did 

not take cell -type annotation s or information about marker genes as its input. In contrast, after applying 

SPLIT, detection of Slc17a7 in these other cell types was still prevalent (Figure 5H). Similarly, after 

applying DeLeakage, detection of Aqp4 became highly con sistent with locations of Astro -Epen cells 

(Figure 5I -L). 

In these visualizations, Slc17a7 appears to diffuse further than Aqp4 . To see whether DeLeakage was 

able to capture the different levels of diffusion of different genes’ transcripts, we examined the diffusion 

parameters learned by the model. We found that the diffusion parameters took on a wide range of 

values , with a mean of 0.37 and a standard deviation of 0.38 (Figure 5M), confirming that it is important 

to include these gene -specific diffusion parameters in the DeLeakage model. 

In the raw data , due to transcript leakage, cells from different cell types were fairly similar (Figure 5N). 

After applying DeLeakage, the different cell types became more distinguishable (Figure 5O). SPLIT 

was also able to achieve this but to a slightly lower extent (Figure 5P).

Finally, we used the scRNA -seq data to define gene pairs expected to have mutually exclusive 

expression (Methods) . After applying DeLeakage, co -detection of these gene pairs in the same cell 

was reduced (Figure 5Q). In contrast, SPLIT did not reduce co -detection of these gene pairs because 

it maintained a positive expression value of all the originally detected genes (Figure 5R).

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

SpotClean was excluded from the above comparisons because it was too computationally demanding 

to be appl ied to the whole mouse section. Therefore , w e cropped a small area and applied DeLeakage, 

SPLIT, and SpotClean to only cells within this region ( Methods, Supplementary Figure 5A). DeLeakage 

again achieved better data adjustments as evidenced by more specific marker expression 

(Supplementary Figure 5B -O), better separation of cell types (Supplementary Figure 5P-S), and lower 

co -detection of mutually exclusive transcripts (Supplementary Figure 5T -V). 

We also applied DeLeakage to the other three ST data sets and found that it successfully adjusted the 

data (Supplementary Figures 6-8, Supplementary Results) .

Improvement of downstream analyses due to data adjustments by DeLeakage 

Next, we investigated whether DeLeakage could improve cell -type annotation of cell clusters (Methods) .

The results show that in all 4 data sets, the cell clusters produced from DeLeakage -adjusted data were 

more consistent with the cell -type annotation s than clusters produced from the raw data , with an 

increase of Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) by 71.7% (Figure 6A). In comparison, SPLIT -adjusted data only 

led to small improvement s, with an increase of ARI by 14.2% (Figure 6A). Correspondingly, locations 

of cells in different cell types also became more consistent with the annotations after applying 

DeLeakage (Figure 6B). Since the cell -type annotation s were produced using both ST and dissociative 

scRNA -seq data together (Methods) , the improvement achieved by DeLe akage has made cell -type 

annotation based on ST data alone easier. 

We also quantified spatially dependent expression in unexpected cell types by spatial auto -correlation 

(Methods) . When a gene is not expected to be expressed in a cell type, the detected transcript level s

in the cells of this cell type should reflect mostly noise and therefore should not show strong spatial 

auto -correlation. Indeed, after applying DeLeakage, such spatial auto -correlation was reduced (Figure 

6C, Supplementary Figure 9), but SPLIT did not consistently achieve that (Figure 6C). 

Finally, we evaluated the running time and peak RAM usage of DeLeakage and found it to be highly 

scalable (Supplementary Figure 10, Supplementary Results). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

Discussion 

To the best of our knowledge, DeLeakage is the first method that can estimate the true underlying 

expression levels and the levels of contamination due to transcript leakage for ST data. DeLeakage 

allows the contamination level of transcript leakage to be gene -specific, which is infeasible by common 

deconvolution methods. As DeLeakage does not require any reference data as input, it avoids 

problems such as batch effects and missing cell types suffered by reference -based deconvolution 

methods. On the theoretical side , we prove that DeLeakage is identifiable because of the spatial 

heterogeneity of neighboring patterns. Computationally, our GPU -parallelized MCMC algorithm 

enables very efficient computation for the large data volume of spatial transcriptomic s data. Empirically, 

applying to both simulated and real data sets, we showed that DeLeakage can effectively remove 

effects of transcript leakage , leading to more accurate quantification of expression levels and less bias 

in various downstream analyses. Due to the lack of gene -specific diffusion parameters and/or reliance 

on an external reference, existing methods were not able to clean up the transcript leakage effects as 

effectively. 

In this study , we use the Gaussian distribution to model the conditional distribution of the observed 

expression data , 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 |𝑍 𝑖 , 𝒁 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) , because of its computation convenience and reasonable 

decontamination performance. For a more delicate modeling, we can replace the Gaussian distribution 

with the negative binomial or the zero -inflated negative binomial distribution to further model the count 

data nature of spatial transcriptomic s data , though at the sacrifice of computation efficiency. In addition, 

the Potts model can be incorporated to model any spatial dependencies of the cell types. 

The current DeLeakage model uses cells as basic units, where the contamination transcripts received 

by a cell are leaked by other cells nearby. As a result, transcripts not assigned to any cell are ignored .

These transcripts could potentially be also informative . For example, a lysed cell can easily leak out 

transcripts to the surrounding, but the cell segmentation algorithm may fail to identify it as a cell .

Therefore, i t would be useful to explore ways to include these transcripts in model ing transcript leakage. 

This approach may also alleviat e errors made by cell segmentation algorithms. 

In this study, we focus ed on tackling the transcript leakage problem and relied on standard methods to 

handle other ST data processing tasks . If transcript leakage also has a strong effect on these tasks , it 

could be useful to incorporate DeLeakage as part of the overall data processing model rather than a 

separate step. Given the prevalence of transcript leakage across tissue types and spatial transcriptomic 

platforms, we envision that DeLeakage will be widely adopted in the analysis of spatial transcriptomic 

data and greatly reduce the risk of data misinterpretation. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Methods 

Real data sets 

The mouse brain MERFISH data set 

The processed mouse brain MERFISH data 25 was downloaded following the descriptions and 

instructions provided at 

https://github.com/AllenInstitute/abc_atlas_access/blob/main/descriptions/MERFISH -C57BL6J -

638850.md . The MERFISH data set was generated using a 500 -gene panel , and it included serial 

coronal slices spanning the entire mouse brain . In the original study, the cell types of the cells in the 

MERFISH data were annotated mapping each of them to the transcriptomic taxonomy defined by the 

scRNA -seq data. We used these cell -type annotation s directly in our analyses. For the MERFISH data, 

normalized expression levels were computed by first dividing raw counts in each cell by its cell volume ,

multiplying the result by 1,000, and then taking log2 after adding one as a pseudo -count. 

We used data from slice #38, which was cut from the middle and covers all brain regions clearly. It 

contained 130,112 cells that passed quality control (QC). 

The companion scRNA -seq data from the same study was downloaded following the instructions at 

https://github.com/AllenInstitute/abc_atlas_access/blob/main/descriptions/WMB -10X.md . Over 700 

scRNA -seq libraries were generated from anatomically defined tissue microdissections of different 

brain regions. In our analysis, we used scRNA -seq data generated by the 10x v3 protocol to minimize 

potential protocol -induced confounding effects , which contained around 2 .3 million cells that passed 

QC . The raw counts and log -normalized gene expression values provided by the original study were 

used in analysis and visualization. We used the cell -type annotation s of the scRNA -seq data provided 

by the original study in our analyses. 

The human heart MERFISH data set 

The processed human developing heart MERFISH data and companion scRNA -seq data 28 were 

downloaded from  https://cells.ucsc.edu/?ds=hoc . The MERFISH data was generated using a 238 -gene 

panel. We analyzed 7 2,962 cells that passed QC. This study also generated companion scRNA -seq 

data with 142,946 cells that passed QC . The scRNA -seq data from samples collected at 13 post -

conception weeks, similar to the MERFISH samples, were used. In the original study, cell types of the 

cells in the MERFISH data were annotated by clustering them based on their gene expression profiles 

followed by assigning cell type labels to the clusters based on marker genes and corresponding scRNA -

seq data. We used the cell -type annotation s of scRNA -seq and MERFISH data provided by the original 

study in our analyses. To normalize MERFISH data, the raw counts were divided by cell volume per 

cell and then scaled up by multiplying 1,000, followed by log2 with one as pseudo -count. For scRNA -

seq data, the raw counts and log -normalized gene expression values provided by the original stu dy 

were used in analysis and visualization. 

The mouse brain Xenium data set 

The mouse brain Xenium data of a coronal slice was downloaded from the 10x Genomics web site 

https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/fresh -frozen -mouse -brain -for -xenium -explorer -demo -1-

standard  on July 18th , 2025 . The downloaded data contain raw cell x gene expression matrix and meta 

data files of 248 genes and 130,870 cells . We performed stringent QC of this data set as follows . We 

filtered out low -quality cells with less than 10 genes with non -zero expression or less than 10 read 

counts , and we also filtered out cells of cell area less than 25 mm2 or at least 3 times of the medium 

cell area. Potential doublets were identified using Scrublet (v 0.2.3 )32 and cells with doublet score at 

least 0.2 were removed. The remaining 129,788 cells were annotated by sc ANVI (packed in scvi -tools 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

v1.3.2 )33 using an annotated mouse brain scRNA -seq data 25 as reference. The Xenium raw counts 

were first normalized by the total number of transcripts using the “normalize_total” function, and then 

log -normalized using “log1p” with “base=2” using the Scanpy package (v 1.10.3) 34 .

The mouse brain Pixel -seq data set 

The processed mouse brain ( olfactory bulb region) Pixel -seq data 29 was downloaded from Gene 

Expression Omnibus (accession number: GSE186097). The corresponding cell -type annotation 

information was downloaded from the GitHub repo sitory at  https://github.com/GuLABatUW/Pixel -seq .

This ST data set contains 20,234 cells that passed QC with a total of 32,711 genes detected . In the 

original study, the cell types of the cells in the Pixel -seq data were annotated using the cell -type 

annotation of a scRNA -seq data set 35 as reference. We used these cell -type annotation s in our 

analyses. For the Pixel -seq data, the raw counts were normalized by the total number of transcripts 

using the “normalize_total” function in Scanpy, and then log -normalized with “log1p” in Scanpy. 

We downloaded mouse olfactory bulb scRNA -seq data 35 from Gene Expression Omnibus (accession 

number: GSE121891 ), based on which the Pixel -seq data was annotated in the original study 29 . The 

processed scRNA -seq data contains 51,426 cells that passed QC and annotated in the original study 35 

with a total of 18,560 genes detected . We used cell -type annotation s provided by the original study in 

our analyses. To simplify the original annotation, cell subtypes were merged consistently for both the 

Pixel -seq data and this scRNA -seq data. The scRNA -seq data were normalized in the same way as 

the Pixel -seq data. 

Analyses for demonstrating the transcript leakage problem 

Exploratory data analysis 

As we observed gene expression variations across brain regions, we further focused our analysis to 

the hippocampus formation (HPF) region , which has a clean structure of Cornu Ammonis (CA ) and 

Dentate Gyrus ( DG ) primarily composed of neurons , for certain analyses . Specifically, the analyses 

shown in Figure 1C -E,G -L were all based on data from the HPF region only. The other analyses , shown 

in Figure 1A -B,F,M -O, and Figure 5, were obtained from the whole brain instead of only the HPF region. 

For the other three real ST data sets, we used the whole tissue section to demonstrate the transcript 

leakage problem. 

Definition of exclusively expressed genes 

We identified a list of marker genes exclusively expressed in each major cell type using the companion 

scRNA -seq data from the HPF region as reference for the mouse brain MERFISH data set . The 

exclusively expressed genes for each cell type were defined a s genes whose transcripts were detected 

in at least 80% of this cell type and at most 10% in each of the other cell types. We compared their 

gene expression in the MERFISH and scRNA -seq data . We further formed mutually exclusive gene 

pairs (g1 , g2 ) whereas g1 and g2 are exclusively expressed marker genes of different cell types. We 

checked the co -detection of mutually exclusive gene pairs in the same cells as implication of 

contamination . To demonstrate the generality of the issue, we extend ed the analysis to cover 12 major 

brain regions (Olfactory areas , Cortical subplate , Hippocampus formation , Isocortex , Striatum , Pallidum ,

Hypothalamus , Thalamus , Midbrain , Pons , Medulla , and Cerebellum ). A set of exclusively expressed 

markers for each major cell type across the brain region was identified firstly based on the scRNA -seq 

data , and then we prioritized for canonical markers and genes identified as exclusivel y expressed 

markers across multiple brain regions. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Analyses of transcript distance to cell centroid and cell distance to potential contamination source 

We performed two distance -based analyses using the exclusively expressed marker genes. Both 

analyses assume that the expression of these markers in the corresponding cell type is endogenous 

expression, while the detection of them in other cell types is potential contamination. The first analysis 

aimed to check the relative closeness of endogenously expressed transcripts to cell centers compared 

to contamination transcripts. The ce ntroid of each cell was estimated as the average coordinate of all 

transcripts assigned to this cell. The Euclidean distance between each transcript and its corresponding 

cell centroid was calculated. For each cell, the mean transcript -to -centroid distance was used as a 

normalization factor. Specifically, each transcript’s distance was divided by the cell -specific mean 

distance, such that a normalized value <1 indicates the transcript is located closer to the cell cent roid 

than average, whereas a value >1 indicates it is farther from the centroid than average. Normalization 

is necessary to combine results across cells. The Welch’s t -test with multiple hypothesis testing 

correction adjusted by Bonferroni Correction was performed to check whether endogenous transcripts 

are significantly closer to cell centroid than potential contamination. The second analysis stratified the 

observed contamination transcript levels by distance s to the contamination sources or cells 

endogenously expressing these transcript s. The basic assumption is that , if the contamination is due 

to transcript leakage, it should exhibit a diffusion -like spatial pattern. For cell type A and its exclusively 

marker gene g, we correlated the detected level of g in cells of different cell types (as an approximation 

of contamination level ) and their distances to the nearest cel l of cell type A (as distance to potential 

contamination source ).

Alternative segmentation strategies 

We used three alternative approaches to perform cell segmentation in addition to the original cell 

segmentation for the mouse brain MERFISH data set . In the first approach, staring with the original 

segmentation, we drew the smallest circle centered at the centroid of the cell segment that covers all 

transcripts assigned to each cell, and then shrank its radius by 50%. In the second approach, we 

performed nuclear segmentation using poly -T staining signals only, as opp osed to the original cell 

segmentation that considers both poly -T and DAPI signals. In both approaches, transcripts that still fall 

within the resulting segment of a cell are more likely to be genuinely expressed by th at cell. In the third 

approach, we used another cell segmentation method, Baysor 36 , as opposed to the original CellPose 

method 37 .

Specifically, t he original cell boundaries were predicted by t he CellPose method as described in the 

paper 25 , using staining images of cellular components including DAPI staining of nuclei and PolyT 

staining of poly -adenylated RNA to approximate cytoplasm . As contamination due to transcript leakage 

exhibits a diffusion -like spatial pattern, transcripts closer to the cell centroids are more likely to be 

endogenous expressed than transcripts closer to the cell boundaries, according to our previous 

analysis . Therefore, t he first method utilized the existing cell segmentation and shrunk the cell radius 

by half. We defined the cell radius as the longest distance from any transcript assigned to this cell to 

the cell centroid estimated by the segmentation method. Then , we excluded tran scripts originally 

assigned to each cell but having a distance to the cell centroid more than half of the original cell radius. 

The remaining transcripts were counted to construct a new cell x gene expression matrix. Only two -

dimensional coordinate s (x, y) were used in this analysis as the CellPose method estimated the cell 

center in two dimensions excluding the Z -axis. 

The second method is nuclei segmentation instead of whole cell segmentation. We called the CellPose 

method through the VizGen postprocessing tools (VPT v1.0.2) to segmentation cell nuclei based on 

DAPI staining images from all 7 Z -stacks. The segmented cells were mapped to annotated cells 

reported in the original study to infer th eir cell types. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

The third method is by seg menting cells using a transcript distribution -based method called Baysor. 

The Baysor (v0.6.2) segmentation took locations of transcripts from all 7 Z -stacks as input. The 

minimum number of molecules/transcripts per gene and per cell were set to 50 and 20 respectively to 

run the Baysor method. The cell radius was estimated as sqrt(area/pi) where the area is the “area of 

the convex hull around the cell molecules” output by Baysor. Cells with an estimated radius of less than 

3 microns and larger than 10 microns were filtered out. The remaining cells were mapped to annotated 

cells reported in the original study to infer their cell types. 

To infer cell -type annotation of the new segmentation and enable direct comparison between two 

segmentations, we aligned the new segmentation (nuclei -only CellPose segmentation and Baysor 

segmentation) to annotated cells reported in the original study segmented by CellPose for the who le 

cell body. For each cell in the new segmentation, we found the nearest annotated cell within a certain 

distance between their cell centers (2 microns for nuclei -only CellPose segmentation and 10 microns 

for Baysor segmentation). A successful alignment r equires that at least 80% of the cell area as defined 

by the bounding box is covered by the other cell . We excluded mappings when more than one cell 

mapped to the same annotated cell. For remaining mappings, we transfer the cell -type annotation from 

the annotated cell to the newly segmented cell. For cells in the HPF region of a MERFISH brain tissue 

sample (C57BL6J -638850.38), 8,029/10,160 (79.0%) annotated cells matched with cell nucleus 

segmented by CellPose. 3,331/10,160 (32.8%) annotated cells matched with cells by Baysor 

segmentation. 

The data normalization follows the same practice as in the original study. The raw count gene 

expression matrix was normalized by cell volume for CellPose segmentation and cell area by Baysor 

segmentation. The normalized values were scaled up by multiplying 1,000 and then taken log2 with 

the pseudo count being 1. 

Details of t he DeLeakage method 

Summary of the DeLeakage model 

The hierarchical model used by DeLeakage to estimate gene expression and diffusion parameters is 

as follows: 

𝑃𝑟 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 ) = 𝜋 𝑘 , where 𝜋 𝑘 ∈ (0,1) for 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾 and ∑ 𝜋 𝑘 

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

= 1;

𝑌 𝑔𝑖 |𝑍 𝑖 , 𝒁 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )~𝑁 (𝛿 𝑖 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 )

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

+ 𝛾 g ∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 = 𝑙 )

> 𝐾
> 𝑙 =1𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

, 𝜎 𝑔 

> 2

).

Collectively,  𝒀 = (𝒀 1, … , 𝒀 𝑁 ), where  𝒀 𝑖 = (𝑌 1𝑖 , … , 𝑌 𝐺𝑖 )𝑇 , are the observed data;  𝒁 = (𝑍 1, … , 𝑍 𝑁 ) are the 

missing data; and the parameters  𝜣 = {𝝅 , (𝝁 1, … , 𝝁 𝐾 ), 𝜸 , 𝛽 , 𝜮 } consist of the cell -type proportions  𝝅 =

(𝜋 1, … , 𝜋 𝐾 ), baseline mean expression levels for each cell type  𝝁 𝑘 = (𝜇 1𝑘 , … , 𝜇 𝐺𝑘 ), the gene -specific 

variance  𝜮 = (𝜎 1

> 2

, … , 𝜎 𝐺 

> 2

) , the gene -specific diffusion parameter  𝜸 = (𝛾 1, … , 𝛾 𝐺 ) , and the decay 

parameter with respect to distance  𝛽 .

Model identifiability 

Proof of Theorem 1. Given  𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 ) = 𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 1, … , 𝒀 𝑁 |𝜣 ) , the marginal probability density function 

𝑓 (𝒀 𝑖 |𝜣 ) for the observed expression  𝒀 𝑖  for cell  𝑖  is a mixture of high -dimensional normal distributions. 

Let  𝑛 𝑖 = |𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )| be the number of neighbors of cell  𝑖  and  𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ] be the  𝑠 -th element of  𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ). As 

𝑍 𝑖  has  𝐾  possibilities and each  𝑍 𝑗  for  𝑗 ∈ 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) has  𝐾  possibilities,  𝑓 (𝒀 𝑖 |𝜣 ) consists of a total of 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

𝐾 × 𝐾 𝑛 𝑖 = 𝐾 𝑛 𝑖 +1 components. Let  𝒜 = {1, … , 𝐾 } and  𝒬 (𝑖 ) = 𝒜 𝑛 𝑖  , and let  𝒘 (𝑖 ) = (𝑤 1

(𝑖 ), … , 𝑤 𝑛 𝑖 

(𝑖 )) ∈ 𝒬 (𝑖 ) be 

a specific configuration of  𝒁 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ), where  𝑤 𝑠 

(𝑖 ) corresponds to  𝑍 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ]. Consequently, each component 

of  𝑓 (𝒀 𝑖 |𝜣 ) corresponds to a configuration of (𝑍 𝑖 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )) and is a multivariate normal distribution whose 

covariance matrix is  𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔 {𝛴 } = 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔 {𝜎 1

2, … , 𝜎 𝐺 

2} and whose mean for each dimension (i.e., each gene) 

is  𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])μ𝑔 𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 . With an abuse of notation, we use  𝑁 (𝑥 ; 𝜇 , 𝜏 2) to represent 

the probability density function for the normal distribution  𝑁 (𝜇 , 𝜏 2) evaluated at  𝑥 . As a result, 

𝑓 (𝒀 𝑖 |𝜣 ) = ∑ [𝜋 𝑘 ( ∏ 𝜋 𝑘 𝑗 

𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

) (∏ 𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ; δ𝑖 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 + 𝛾 𝑔 ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝜇 𝑔 𝑘 𝑗 

𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

, 𝜎 𝑔 

2)

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

)]

𝑘 ∈𝒜 ,𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ),𝑘 𝑗 ∈𝒜 

= ∑ [𝜋 𝑘 𝑔 𝝅 

(𝑖 )(𝒘 (𝑖 )) ∏ 𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ; 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 + 𝛾 𝑔 ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1

, 𝜎 𝑔 

2)

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

]

𝑘 ∈𝒜 ,𝝕 (𝑖 )∈𝒬 (𝑖 )

, (1)

where  𝑔 𝝅 

(𝑖 )(𝒘 (𝑖 )) = ∏ ∏ 𝜋 𝑘 

𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 =𝑘 )𝐾 

𝑘 =1𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) = ∏ 𝜋 𝑘 

∑ 𝐼 (𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

=𝑘 )

> 𝑛 𝑖
> 𝑠 =1

𝐾 

𝑘 =1 .

Because the multivariate normal mixture model is identifiable up to label switching so that 

∑ 𝑝 𝑙 𝑁 (𝒎 𝑙 , 𝛩 𝑙 )𝐿 

𝑙 =1 = ∑ 𝑝 𝑙 

∗𝑁 (𝒎 𝑙 

∗, 𝛩 𝑙 

∗)𝐿 ∗

𝑙 =1 if and only if  𝒎 𝑙 = 𝒎 𝜌 (𝑙 )

∗ , 𝛩 𝑙 = 𝛩 𝜌 (𝑙 )

∗ , and  𝑝 𝑙 = 𝑝 𝜌 (𝑙 )

∗ , for  𝑙 = 1, … , 𝐿 

> 38

, Equation (1) and  𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 ) = 𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 ∗) give that  𝐾 𝑛 𝑖 +1 = (𝐾 ∗)𝑛 𝑖 +1 so that  𝐾 = 𝐾 ∗ and there exists a 

permutation 

𝛹 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )) = (𝜏 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )), 𝜓 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 ))) : 𝒜 × 𝒬 (𝑖 ) → 𝒜 × 𝒬 (𝑖 ),

where  𝜏 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )): 𝒜 × 𝒬 (𝑖 ) → 𝒜  and  𝜓 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )) = (𝜓 1

(𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )), … , 𝜓 𝑛 𝑖 

(𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 ))) : 𝒜 × 𝒬 (𝑖 ) → 𝒬 (𝑖 ) ,

such that 

𝜋 𝑘 𝑔 𝝅 

(𝑖 )(𝑾 (𝑖 )) = 𝜋 𝜏 (𝑖 )(𝑘 ,𝒘 (𝑖 ))

∗ 𝑔 𝝅 ∗

(𝑖 ) (𝜓 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝒘 (𝑖 ))) , (2)

𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 + 𝛾 𝑔 ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1

= 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝜏 (𝑖 )(𝑘 ,𝒘 (𝑖 ))

∗ + 𝛾 𝑔 

∗ ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 𝜓 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

(𝑘 ,𝒘 (𝑖 ))

∗

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1

,

σ𝑔 = σ𝑔 

∗ ,

for  𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁 , 𝑔 = 1, … , 𝐺 , 𝑘 ∈ 𝒜 , and  𝒘 (𝑖 ) ∈ 𝒬 (𝑖 ). For a given cell type  𝑘 , the mean expression level 

of its marker gene  𝑔 (𝑘 ) for the mixture component of the configuration (𝑍 𝑖 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )) = (𝑘 , 𝑘 𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) = (𝑘 , … , 𝑘 )

under  𝜣  is: 

𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑍 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 = (𝛿 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 ) 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 ,

which is greater than  𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑘 ′ + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 𝑤 𝑠 

> ′(𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 for any other configuration (𝑘 ′, 𝒘 ′(𝑖 ))

according to Condition (C1). Similarly, denote the cell type in which gene  𝑔 (𝑘 ) has the highest 

expression level under the alternative parameterization  𝜣 ∗ as  ρ(𝑘 ) , then under  𝜣 ∗ , the mixture 

component of  𝑓 (𝒀 𝑖 |𝜣 ) that has highest mean for gene  𝑔 (𝑘 ) must be (𝑍 𝑖 , 𝒘 (𝑖 )) = (𝜌 (𝑘 ), 𝜌 (𝑘 )𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) and 

𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑍 𝑖 

∗ + γ𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑤 𝑠 

> (𝑖 )

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 = (𝛿 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 ) 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ ,

which equals (𝛿 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )[𝑠 ])

𝑛 𝑖 

𝑠 =1 ) 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘  . Consequently,  𝜏 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝑘 𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) = 𝜌 (𝑘 ) and 

𝜓 (𝑖 )(𝑘 , 𝑘 𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) = 𝜌 (𝑘 )𝟏 𝑛 𝑖  for  𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁  . As a result, from Equation (2) , we obtain  𝜋 𝑘 𝑔 𝝅 (𝑘 𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) =

𝜋 𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ 𝑔 𝝅 (𝜌 (𝑘 )𝟏 𝑛 𝑖 ) so that (𝜋 𝑘 )𝑛 𝑖 +1 = (𝜋 ρ(𝑘 )

∗ )𝑛 𝑖 +1 and hence  𝜋 𝑘 = 𝜋 𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ . Meanwhile, for any gene  𝑔 , we 

have 

{𝛿 𝑖 + γ𝑔 ( ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )

𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

)} 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 = {𝛿 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 

∗ ( ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )

𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

)} 𝜇 𝑔𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ (3)

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

In particular, for the marker gene  𝑔 (𝑘 ) , Equation (3) leads to {1 +

𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 

𝛿 𝑖 

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 = {1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 

𝛿 𝑖 

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ . Now by taking 

cells  𝑖 1, 𝑖 2 and  𝑖 3 mentioned in Condition (C2), we obtain 

{1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 2

𝛿 𝑖 2

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 2𝑗 2 )𝑗 2∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 − {1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1 )𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 

{1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 3

𝛿 𝑖 3

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 3𝑗 3 )𝑗 3∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 − {1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 ) (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1 )𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝑘 

=

{1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 2

𝛿 𝑖 2

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 2𝑗 2 )𝑗 2∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ − {1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1 )𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗

{1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 3

𝛿 𝑖 3

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 3𝑗 3 )𝑗 3∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ − {1 + 𝛾 𝑔 (𝑘 )

∗ (∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1 )𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1) )} 𝜇 𝑔 (𝑘 )𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗

,

which result in 

∑ 𝛿 𝑗 2

> 𝛿 𝑖 2

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 2𝑗 2)𝑗 2∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) −∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

> 𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1)𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)

∑ 𝛿 𝑗 3

> 𝛿 𝑖 3

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 3𝑗 3)𝑗 3∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 3) −∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

> 𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1)𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)

=

∑ 𝛿 𝑗 2

> 𝛿 𝑖 2

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 2𝑗 2)𝑗 2∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2) −∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

> 𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1)𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)

∑ 𝛿 𝑗 3

> 𝛿 𝑖 3

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 3𝑗 3)𝑗 3∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 3) −∑ 𝛿 𝑗 1

> 𝛿 𝑖 1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖 1𝑗 1)𝑗 1∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)

,

so that  ℎ𝑖 2(𝛽 )−ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 )

ℎ𝑖 3(𝛽 )−ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 ) = ℎ𝑖 2(𝛽 ∗)−ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 ∗)

ℎ𝑖 3(𝛽 ∗)−ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 ∗) and hence  ℎ(𝛽 ) = ℎ(𝛽 ∗). According to Condition (C2),  ℎ(x) is strictly 

monotone, and therefore,  𝛽 = 𝛽 ∗ . Notice that Condition (C2) also implies that  ℎ𝑖 3 (𝛽 ) − ℎ𝑖 1 (𝛽 ) ≠ 0.

Consequently, for each gene  𝑔 , by comparing the corresponding equations of Equation (3) for cells  𝑖 1

and  𝑖 3, we can obtain that 

(1 + ℎ𝑖 3 (𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 )𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

(1 + ℎ𝑖 1 (𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 )𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

= (1 + ℎ𝑖 3 (𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 

∗)𝜇 𝑔𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗

(1 + ℎ𝑖 1 (𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 

∗)𝜇 𝑔𝜌 (𝑘 )

∗ .

As a result,  1+ℎ𝑖 3(𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 

1+ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 

= 1+ℎ𝑖 3(𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔 

> ∗

1+ℎ𝑖 1(𝛽 )𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

so that  𝛾 𝑔 = 𝛾 𝑔 

∗ for each gene  𝑔  . After plugging in  𝛾 𝑔 = 𝛾 𝑔 

∗ into 

Equation (3), we have  𝝁 𝑘 = 𝝁 𝜌 (𝑘 ). Thus, the DeLeakage model is identifiable up to label switching. 

An example situation in which Condition (C2) is fulfilled. For the extreme case when all the cells' 

volumes are the same, say  𝛿 ̃ , and the distances between a given cell  𝑖  and all of its neighboring cells 

are identical, say  𝑑 𝑖 , then  ℎ(𝑥 ) = |𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 2)|𝑒 −𝑑 2𝑥 −|𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)|𝑒 −𝑑 1𝑥 

|𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 3)|𝑒 −𝑑 3𝑥 −|𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 1)|𝑒 −𝑑 1𝑥  so that as long as the distances satisfies  𝑑 3 ≥

𝑑 1 ≥ 𝑑 2 or  𝑑 3 ≤ 𝑑 1 ≤ 𝑑 2 and the number of neighboring cells are different, excluding the degenerate 

case where  𝑑 3 = 𝑑 1 = 𝑑 2, Condition (C2) is fulfilled. 

Prior and posterior distributions 

We assign independent priors to each component of  𝜣  and let  𝝅 = (𝜋 1, … , 𝜋 𝐾 )~𝐷𝑖𝑟 (𝛼 , … , 𝛼 ) ,

𝜇 𝑔𝑘 ~𝑁 (𝑚 𝑔 , 𝜎 𝜇 

2) for  𝑔 = 1, … , 𝐺  and  𝑘 = 1 … , 𝐾  , 𝛾 𝑔 ~𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝑎 𝛾 , 𝑏 𝛾 ) for  𝑔 = 1, … , 𝐺  , and  𝛽 ~𝛤 (𝑎 𝛽 , 𝑏 𝛽 ) ,

𝜎 𝑔 

2~𝐼𝑛𝑣𝛤 (𝑎 𝜎 , 𝑏 𝜎 ) for  𝑔 = 1, … , 𝐺 . Consequently, the full posterior distribution becomes: 

𝑓 (𝜣 , 𝒁 |𝒀 ) ∝ 𝑃𝑟 (𝒀 |𝜣 , 𝒁 )𝑃𝑟 (𝒁 |𝜣 )𝑃 𝑟 (𝜣 )

= ∏ {∏ 𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ; 𝜂 𝑔𝑖 , 𝜎 𝑔 

2)

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

} ∙

𝑁 

𝑖 =1

∏ {∏ 𝜋 𝑘 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 =𝑘 )

𝐾 

𝑘 =1

}

𝑁 

𝑖 =1

∙ ∏ ∏ 𝑁 (𝜇 𝑔𝑘 ; 𝑚 , 𝜎 𝜇 

2)

𝐾 

𝑘 =1

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

∙ ∏ 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 ; 𝑎 𝛾 , 𝑏 𝛾 )

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

∙ 𝛤 (𝑎 𝛽 , 𝑏 𝛽 ) ∙ ∏ 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝛤 (𝜎 𝑔 

2; 𝑎 𝜎 , 𝑏 𝜎 )

𝐺 

𝑔 =1

∙ 𝐷𝑖𝑟 (𝝅 ; 𝜶 ),

where  𝜂 𝑔𝑖 = 𝛿 𝑖 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑘 )𝐾 

𝑘 =1 + 𝛾 g ∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 = 𝑙 )𝐾 

𝑙 =1𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Posterior inference 

To sample from the posterior distribution of each parameter, we developed an MCMC algorithm built 

upon the Gibbs sampler 39 . At any iteration  𝑡 + 1:

1.  We sample  𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

(𝑡 +1) from  𝑁 (𝑚 𝑔𝑘 

𝜉 𝑔𝑘  

> 2

, 1

𝜉 𝑔𝑘  

> 2

), where :

𝑚 𝑔𝑘 = 1

(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2 {∑ 𝑎 𝑖𝑔𝑘 𝑏 𝑖𝑔𝑘 𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝑘  

> (𝑡 )

+ ∑ 𝑐 𝑗𝑔𝑘 𝑑 𝑗𝑔𝑘 𝑗 ∈𝐽 𝑘  

> (𝑡 )

} + 𝑚 𝑔 

𝜎 𝜇  

> 2

,

𝜉 𝑔𝑘 

2 = 1

(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2 {∑ 𝑎 𝑖𝑔𝑘 

2

𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝑘  

> (𝑡 )

+ ∑ 𝑐 𝑗𝑔𝑘 

2

𝑗 ∈𝐽 𝑘  

> (𝑡 )

} + 1

𝜎 𝜇 

> 2

,

𝐼 𝑘 

(𝑡 ) = {𝑖 : 𝑍 𝑖 

(𝑡 ) = 𝑘 },

𝐽 𝑘 

(𝑡 ) = {𝑗 : 𝑍 𝑗 

(𝑡 ) ≠ 𝑘 , ∑ 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 ′

(𝑡 ) = 𝑘 )

𝑗 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑗 )

> 0},

𝑎 𝑖𝑔𝑘 = 𝛿 𝑖 + 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑖 ′𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑖 ′)𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 ′

(𝑡 ) = 𝑘 )

𝑖 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

,

𝑏 𝑖𝑔𝑘 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑖 ′𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑖 ′) ∑ 𝜇 ̃𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 

(𝑡 ) = 𝑙 )

𝑙 ≠𝑘 𝑖 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )

,

𝑐 𝑗𝑔𝑘 = 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 ′𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑗𝑗 ′)𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 ′

(𝑡 ) = 𝑘 )𝑗 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑗 ) , and 

𝑑 𝑖𝑔𝑘 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑗 − 𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 ̃ 𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 

(𝑡 ) = 𝑙 )

𝑙 ≠𝑘 

− 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 ′𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑗𝑗 ′) ∑ 𝜇 ̃𝑔𝑙 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 ′

(𝑡 ) = 𝑙 )

𝑙 ≠𝑘 𝑗 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑗 )

.

Due to the sequential sampling of  𝜇 𝑔𝑘  for  𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 , we denote  𝜇 ̃ 𝑔𝑙  as the current state of  𝜇 𝑔𝑙 

when updating  𝜇 𝑔𝑘  for brevity. 

2.  For the gene -specific contamination parameter, we update  𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) by a Metropolis -Hastings step 

with the proposal as  𝑔 (𝛾 𝑔 

∗|𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ))~𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) 3⁄ ) or  𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )) . The procedure of 

generating candidates is as follows: 

(a)  Generate  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) 3⁄ ) and keep it if the sampled value is between 0 and 1; 

(b)  Otherwise, generate  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )).

Denote  𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛾 ) = ∏ 𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ;𝜁 𝑖𝑔  

> ∗

,(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2)

𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ;𝜁 𝑖𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2)

𝑁 

𝑖 =1 ∙ 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

;𝑎 𝛾 ,𝑏 𝛾 )

𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

;𝑎 𝛾 ,𝑏 𝛾 ) , where  𝜁 𝑖𝑔 

∗ = 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) +

𝛾 𝑔 

∗ ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑗 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) and  𝜁 𝑖𝑔 

(𝑡 ) = 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) + 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑗 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) . We 

accept  𝛾 𝑔 

∗ with probability  𝜌 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 {𝑟 (𝛾 ), 1}, where: 

• If  𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )~ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1) 3⁄ ) and  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) 3⁄ ), we have  𝑟 (𝛾 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛾 ) ∙ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

;𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

,𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

3⁄ )

𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

;𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,𝛾 𝑔  

> (𝑡 )

3⁄ );

• If  𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )~ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1) 3⁄ ) and  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )), we have  𝑟 (𝛾 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛾 ) ∙ 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

;𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

,1−𝛾 𝑔 

> ∗

)

𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

;𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,𝛾 𝑔  

> (𝑡 )

3⁄ ) ;

• If  𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )~ 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1)) and  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~ 𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ) 3⁄ ) , we have  𝑟 (𝛾 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛾 ) ∙

𝑁 (𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

;𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

,𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

3⁄ )

𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

> ∗

;𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,1−𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

);

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint 17 

• If  𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )~ 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 −1)) and  𝛾 𝑔 

∗~𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 ), 1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 )) , we have  𝑟 (𝛾 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛾 ) ∙

𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

;𝛾 𝑔  

> ∗

,1−𝛾 𝑔 

> ∗

)

𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (𝛾 𝑔 

> ∗

;𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,1−𝛾 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

).

3.  For the distance decay contamination parameter, we update  𝛽 (𝑡 +1) by a Metropolis -Hastings 

step with the proposal as  𝑔 (𝛽 ∗|𝛽 (𝑡 ))~𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 ), 𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ) or  𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ) . The procedure of 

generating candidates is as follows: 

(a)  Generate  𝛽 ∗~𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 ), 𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ) and keep it if the sampled value is between 0 and 1; 

(b)  Otherwise, generate  𝛽 ∗~ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ).

Denote  𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛽 ) = ∏ 𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ;𝜗 𝑖𝑔  

> ∗

,(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2)

𝑁 (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 ;𝜗 𝑖𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

,(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 )

)2)

𝑁 

𝑖 =1 ∙ 𝛤 (𝛽 ∗;𝑎 𝛽 ,𝑏 𝛽 )

𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 );𝑎 𝛽 ,𝑏 𝛽 ) , where  𝜗 𝑖𝑔 

∗ = 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) +

𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ∗𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑗 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) and  𝜗 𝑖𝑔 

(𝑡 ) = 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑖 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) + 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝜇 𝑔 𝑍 𝑗 

> (𝑡 )

(𝑡 +1) .

We accept  β∗ with probability  𝜌 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 {𝑟 (𝛽 ), 1}, where: 

• If  𝛽 (𝑡 )~ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 −1), 𝛽 (𝑡 −1) 3⁄ ) and  𝛽 ∗~ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 ), 𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ), we have  𝑟 (𝛽 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛽 ) ∙ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 );𝛽 ∗,𝛽 ∗ 3⁄ )

𝑁 (𝛽 ∗;𝛽 (𝑡 ),𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ );

• If  𝛽 (𝑡 )~ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 −1), 𝛽 (𝑡 −1) 3⁄ ) and  𝛽 ∗~ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ), we have  𝑟 (𝛽 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛽 ) ∙ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 );𝛽 ∗ 3⁄ ,1 3⁄ )

𝑁 (𝛽 ∗;𝛽 (𝑡 ),𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ );

• If  𝛽 (𝑡 )~ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 −1) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ) and  𝛽 ∗~ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 ), 𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ), we have  𝑟 (𝛽 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛽 ) ∙ 𝑁 (𝛽 (𝑡 );𝛽 ∗,𝛽 ∗ 3⁄ )

𝛤 (𝛽 ∗;𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ,1 3⁄ );

• If  𝛽 (𝑡 )~ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 −1) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ) and  𝛽 ∗~ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ , 1 3⁄ ), we have  𝑟 (𝛽 ) = 𝑟 𝑝 

(𝛽 ) ∙ 𝛤 (𝛽 (𝑡 );𝛽 ∗ 3⁄ ,1 3⁄ )

𝛤 (𝛽 ∗;𝛽 (𝑡 ) 3⁄ ,1 3⁄ ).

4.  We sample (𝜎 𝑔 

2)(𝑡 +1) from  𝐼𝑛𝑣𝛤 (𝑎 𝜎 + 𝑁 

2 , 𝑏 𝜎 + 1

2 ∑ (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 − 𝜍 𝑖𝑔 )2𝑁 

𝑖 =1 ) , where  𝜍 𝑖𝑔 =

𝛿 𝑖 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

(𝑡 +1)𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 

(𝑡 ) = 𝑘 )𝐾 

𝑘 =1 − 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 )𝑑 𝑖𝑗 ) ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 

(𝑡 +1)𝐼 (𝑍 𝑗 

(𝑡 ) = 𝑙 )𝐾 

𝑙 =1 .

5.  For the cell type proportion, we sample  𝝅 (𝑡 +1) from Dirichlet distribution  𝐷𝑖𝑟 (∑ 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 

(𝑡 ) = 1) +𝑁 

𝑖 =1

𝛼 , … , ∑ 𝐼 (𝑍 𝑖 

(𝑡 ) = 𝐾 ) + 𝛼 𝑁 

𝑖 =1 ).

6.  For each cell  𝑖 , we update its cell type label according to 

𝑃𝑟 {𝑍 𝑖 

(𝑡 +1) = 𝑘 |−} ∝ 𝜋 𝑘 

(𝑡 +1)𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− ∑ (𝑌 𝑔𝑖 −𝜆 𝑔𝑖 )2

2(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 +1)

)2

𝐺 

𝑔 =1 ) ∙ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− ∑ ∑ (𝑌 𝑔𝑗 −𝜐 𝑔𝑗 )2

2(𝜎 𝑔 

> (𝑡 +1)

)2

𝐺 

𝑔 =1𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) ),

where  𝜆 𝑔𝑖 = 𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

(𝑡 +1) + 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) ∑ 𝛿 𝑖 ′𝑖 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 +1)𝑑 𝑖 𝑖 ′ ) ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 

(𝑡 +1)𝐼 (𝑍 ̃𝑖 ′ = 𝑙 )𝐾 

𝑙 =1 and  𝜐 𝑔𝑗 =

𝛿 𝑗 ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 

(𝑡 +1)𝐼 (𝑍 ̃𝑗 = 𝑙 )𝐾 

𝑙 =1 + 𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1) ∑ 𝛿 𝑗 ′𝑗 ′∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑗 )\{𝑖 } 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 (𝑡 +1)𝑑 𝑗 𝑗 ′ ) ∑ 𝜇 𝑔𝑙 

(𝑡 +1)𝐼 (𝑍 ̃𝑗 ′ = 𝑙 )𝐾 

𝑙 =1 +

𝛾 𝑔 

(𝑡 +1)𝛿 𝑖 𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

(𝑡 +1). Due to the sequential sampling of  𝑍 𝑖  for  𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁 , we denote  𝑍 ̃𝑗  as the current 

state of  𝑍 𝑗  when updating  𝑍 𝑖  for brevity. 

After the burn -in period, we can use the mode of the posterior samples of  𝑍 𝑖  to infer the cell type for 

each cell and the mean of the posterior samples to estimate the other parameters. We compute 

corrected transcript level for gene  𝑔  in cell  𝑖  as  𝑌 ̃𝑔𝑖 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 − 𝛾 ̂g ∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 ̂ 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 )𝛿 𝑗 𝜇 ̂𝑔 𝑍 ̂𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ) . If the 

computed value of  𝑌 ̃𝑔𝑖  is smaller than zero , we set it to zero .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Parallel computation 

The large data volume of ST data calls for parallel computing. Fortunately, unlike general MCMC 

algorithms constrained by sequential updates, steps (1), (2), and (4) can be computed in parallel for 

either all genes or all cells .

The parallelization for step (6), the update of cell -type label  𝑍 𝑖 , is more challenging because the full 

conditional distribution of  𝑍 𝑖  depends not only on cell  𝑖  ’s gene expression profile but also on its 

neighbors’ gene expression profiles. Therefore, we propose to implement a scheme as shown in Figure 

3. Suppose the maximum distance between any two neighboring cells is  𝑟 . (a) First, we will randomly 

sample a cell from the entire tissue slice. After excluding this cell and all cells within its  2𝑟  neighborhood, 

we will sample a second cell. We will then exclude both the first and second cells, along with all cells 

within their  2𝑟  neighborhoods, and we will randomly sample a third cell. This process will be repeated 

until we run out of cells, and all the selected cells will be assigned to layer 1. (b) After excluding cells 

from layer 1, we will repeat the process to select cells for layer 2. (c) After excluding cells from layers 

1 and 2, we will select cells for layers 3. We will repeat the process until we can select fewer than 100 

cells; we will denote the resulting layer as layer  𝑀 . Subsequently, we will collect all remaining cells to 

be grouped into layer  𝑀 + 1. (d) As cells within the same layer for layers 1 to  𝑀  will not be each other’s 

neighbor and hence not in each other’s Markov blankets, their  𝑍 𝑖  values can be updated in parallel. (f) 

For cells in layer  𝑀 + 1, we will update their  𝑍 𝑖 ’s sequentially. 

For GPU computation, we further leverage the reduction technique, which takes advantage of the 

architecture of GPU. For example, to sum over 1,204 numbers using reduction, in cycle 1, every two 

of the 1,024 numbers will be summed in parallel to produce 512 values; in cycle 2, the 512 values will 

be further added up and reduced to 256, and so on. Thus, the calculations in steps (3) and (5) can also 

be parallelized for summations over cells. 

Hyper -parameter settings when applying DeLeakage to simulated and real data 

For each cell  𝑖  , we define its neighborhood , 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 ), based on a fixed radius  𝑟  : any cell  𝑗  with Euclidean 

distance  𝑑 𝑖𝑗 < 𝑟  is denoted as a neighbor ( 𝑗 ∈ 𝑁𝑒𝑖 (𝑖 )). We choose the fixed value of  𝑟  to ensure that 

the median number of neighbors across cells is a prespecified value. In both our simulation and real -

data analyses, we set  𝑟  such that the median neighborhood size is 10. For the cell size factor  𝛿 𝑖 , if the 

volumes of cells are not available,  𝛿 𝑖  can be computed alternatively as  𝑆 𝑖  

> 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎 𝑛 𝑗 =1
> 𝑁 𝑆 𝑗

, where  𝑆 𝑖 = ∑ 𝑌 𝑖𝑔 

> 𝐺
> 𝑔 =1

is the total read counts of cell  𝑖  . The hyper -parameters of prior distributions are set as follow:  𝛼 = 0.5 ,

𝑚 𝑔 = ∑ 𝑌 𝑖𝑔  

> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1
> 𝑁

, 𝜎 𝜇  

> 2

= 5, 𝑎 𝛽 = 0.0001 , 𝑏 𝛽 = 1, 𝑎 𝜎 = 1, 𝑏 𝜎 = 1.

Simulat ed data 

An artificial tissue with 5 cell types was simulated, in which the different cell types roughly occupy 

distinct spatial territories but there are also cells that are present within the territories of other cell types 

(Figure 4A). Expression of 250 genes we re simulated, which included i) genes with a high mean 

expression level in only one cell type, which mimic cell type markers, ii) genes with a high mean 

expression level in two cell types but at different levels, and iii) genes with the same mean expressio n

level in all cell types , which mimic house -keeping genes (Figure 4B). For each cell, the detected 

transcript level of each gene was simulated by sampling a real expression level from the defined 

distribution followed by adding contamination caused by transcripts leaked by nearby cells according 

to the gene’s di ffusion parameter. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Specifically, to generate the required pattern s, we first uniformly sampled 20,000 points from a

rectangle of size 2,400  2,000 and then kept the 15,261 points within the tissue region as the centroid s

of the cells. As a result, a total of  𝑁 = 15 ,261  cells remained, and the median number of neighbors for 

each cell is 10. Next, after defining the five spatial domains, we randomly assigned cell -type labels to 

cells within each domain, with 80% probability coming from the primary cell type of each domain and 

5% probability from each of the other four cell types. The cell size factor  𝛿 𝑖  of each cell was sampled 

from  𝑁 (1,0.01 ). The gene panel consists of  𝐺 = 250 , and the true underlying mean expression levels 

for each cell type are shown in Figure 4B. Specifically, the first 100 genes are set as the cell type 

marker genes that are expressed in only one cell type, and the numbers of marker genes for cell types 

1-5 are set as 20, 25, 30, 10, and 15 , respectively. The next 100 genes are set to be highly expressed 

in two cell types with differential expression between the two cell types, and these genes induce 

similarity between cell types. Finally, the last 50 genes represent housekeeping genes that are 

expressed in all cell types. The gene -specific variance  𝜎 𝑔  

> 2

is set as 0.01 for all the genes. We sampled 

the gene -specific contamination parameters  𝛾 𝑔  ’s from a uniform distribution  𝑈 (0.1,0.2) for  𝑔 =

1, . . . ,250  and set the remaining  𝛾 𝑔  ’s as 0.001 for  𝑔 = 251 , . . . ,300  to mimic the set of genes that do not 

suffer from transcript leakage. The decay parameter of contamination  𝛽  is set as 0.01 so that the range 

of  𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛽 𝑑 𝑖𝑗 ) is between 0.7 and 1, according to what is observed from the real data. Under these 

three gene settings, we first simulated the underlying true expression s determined only by cell -type 

effects. We then generated the observed expression s by adding transcript leakage from neighboring 

cells. As a result, due to transcript leakage, while the spatial patterns of the true underlying expression 

levels of the marker genes can clearly show the five spatial domains (Figure 4F, Supplementary Figure 

3A,F,K,P) , the spatial patterns of the observed transcript levels of the marker genes are much more 

ambiguous (Figure 4G, Supplementary Figure 3B,G,L,Q) .

Comparisons with ST data denoising methods 

The methods compared 

We compared DeLeakage with two ST data denoising methods, SPLIT (v0.1.0 ) and SpotClean (v1.4.1 ).

SPLIT was designed for in situ ST data at subcellular resolution . SpotClean was designed for removing 

noises in spot -based ST data with background spots which are supposed to have no expression. 

Applying SPLIT 

The SPLIT method 23 assume s that noisy signals from neighboring cells of different cell types can be 

removed by estimating the proportion of different cell types forming the observed gene expression 

through cell type decomposition. It relies on a third -party cell -type decomposition method, RCTD 21 , to 

identify the primary and secondary cell types forming each ST cell, based on a scRNA -seq reference 

data set. SPLIT ran RCTD decomposition in the “doublet” mode. SPLIT further postprocessed the 

RCTD decomposition results and further inferred the corrected counts using the “purify” function with 

“DO_purify_singlets=TRUE” , which scales the observed expression to a purified expression level with 

the scaling factor being the primary cell type’s expected fraction of transcripts. 

For the simulation study, the reference single -cell RNA -seq data were simulated to include all five cell 

types. For each cell type, 600 cells were generated, resulting in a total of 3,000 reference cells. The 

gene expression values for these reference cell s were generated using the same cell -type mean 

expression levels and gene -specific variance parameters as those used to simulate the underlying true 

gene expression in the simulated spatial transcriptomics data, while there is no contamination or 

leakage e ffect added to the reference single -cell data. Therefore, the simulated reference data 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

represent clean cell -type -specific expression profiles. Then, SPLIT adjusts the observed expression 

levels through a deconvolution -based procedure. 

For the adult mouse brain MERFISH data 25 , the scRNA -seq data, generated in the same study using 

10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3’ v3 protocol, was used as the scRNA -seq reference data which 

is required to run RCTD. The original data contains around 2.3 million cells, which imposes a big 

challenge as running RCTD on all scRNA -seq data uses more than 1TB RAM. To constrain the 

resources usage to a practical level, the scRNA -seq data was randomly down -sampled to 234K cells, 

around 1/10 of its original cell number. After down -sampling, each major cell type still has over 8K cells .

The RCTD was run in the major cell type level. The resulting RCTD estimates, including cell -type 

proportions and cell -type -specific mean expression levels, were subsequently used by SPLIT to 

deconvolute and adjust the observed expression levels. 

Applying SpotClean 

SpotClean 20 aims to tackle spot swapping, which happens when messenger RNAs bleed between 

nearby spots and hence cause contamination of expression levels, for spot -based ST methods. 

SpotClean assumes a transcript diffusion model with a global swapping rate and levera ges background 

spots that are supposed to have no expression to estimate the model parameters and remove 

contamination. We applied SpotClean to image -based ST data as follows. Firstly, SpotClean requires 

empty or background spots to estimate background signals . To simulate background spots for image -

based ST data , we used transcripts not assigned to any cells as background transcripts , and sampled 

spot s of size s similar as cells in the tissue slide , and we aggregated background transcripts to generate 

the gene expression profile for each spot as background spot . Following the suggestion by the original 

authors, we set the background spot ratio to 25% of all cells or spots . Secondly, SpotClean assumes 

that all spots have the same sizes. Therefore, for each cell in image -based ST data, we normalized the 

raw read counts by cell volume or total transcripts and used the normaliz ed gene expression as the 

input of the SpotClean method. 

For the simulation study, the background spot expressions are generated as follows. First, we use d the 

filtered -out locations (4,739 locations) to represent the background spots, which are outside of the 

tissue region. Second, each location wa s contaminated by transcripts leaked from nearby locations, 

consistent with the assumption adopted by SpotClean. Third, the expression at each background 

location wa s generated only based on contamination. Different from the generation of observed 

expressions within the tissue region, endogenous gene expression was omitted for background spots, 

because these locations were assumed not to contain cells or intrinsic bio logical signals . Using both 

the observed tissue -region expression and the simulated background expression as input, SpotClean 

then adjust ed the observed expression levels. 

For the adult mouse brain MERFISH data 25 , we simulated the background spots by partitioning the 

tissue slide into 10 μm x 10 μm x 10 μm voxels in three dimensions (X, Y and Z) accordingly . Because 

the thickness (Z -dimension) of the tissue slide is around 10 μm , the partition was in fact performed in 

two -dimensional space (X and Y) . The volume of e ach voxel is 1000 μm3. We calculated number of 

transcripts falling in each voxel. We filtered out voxels potentially falling outside the tissue region , which 

were defined as these having zero transcript in itself , and also having zero transcript in any of its six 

surrounding voxels . To avoid background voxels overlapping too much with cell area, we further filtered 

out voxels with over half of transcripts falling within the voxel and being assigned to segmented cells. 

The remaining voxels were used as background voxels or spots. For each background voxel , the 

transcripts falling within the voxel and not being assigned to any cells were aggregated to generate its 

observed transcript count profile. The centroid of each voxel was used as its coordinates to run 

SpotClean . Furthermore, due to the extremely high RAM usage (closed to 1 TB RAM) of SpotClean on 

the whole tissue region, we select ed a sub -region for the analysis .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Performance measures 

We systematically evaluated the performance of DeLeakage and the two ST denoising methods in 

terms of sign al specificity and effects on downstream analys es in both cell type -agnostic and cell type -

aware manner .

Signal specificity was evaluated using exclusively expressed marker genes , the exclusiveness of which 

were validated in the reference sc/snRNA -seq data . Due to the transcript leakage, the exclusiv ely 

expressed marker genes are observed in other unrelated cell types. To evaluate signal specificity, we 

used Jaccard index of exclusively expressed gene pairs where each gene pair (g1, g2) are expected 

to be exclusively expressed marker genes of two different cell types . Calculation of Jaccard index does 

not need cell -type annotation of ST data , and so is cell -type agnostic . The value of Jaccard index 

ranges from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating perfect exclusiveness and 1 indicating co -observing in every cell. 

The e ffect of denoising on cell -type annotation was evaluated by calculating Cosine similarity between 

each pair of cell types using their average gene expression profiles . Lower cosine similarity indicates 

greater transcriptional divergence between cell types, suggesting improved separability for 

downstream cell -type annotation .

Performance measures specifically for simulation data 

For the simulation study, the underlying true expression is available, allowing us to calculate the 

residuals between the decontaminated expression and the true expression. Here we denote  𝑌 ̂𝑔𝑖  as the 

adjusted expressions and then the residuals of expressions are defined as  𝑟 𝑔𝑖 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 − 𝑌 ̂𝑔𝑖 . For each 

gene  𝑔  , we can have different distribution of  𝑟 𝑔𝑖  from different methods and then used the boxplots and 

violin plots to display . Residual distributions more concentrated around zero indicate that the 

decontaminated expression is closer to the underlying true expression. 

Furthermore, based on the predefined gene -panel design, including marker genes and DE genes, we 

conducted pairwise t -tests between cell types. For example, marker genes are expected to be 

differentially expressed between their corresponding cell type and t he other cell types, while showing 

no differential expression between unrelated cell -type pairs. A similar evaluation was performed for the 

predefined DE genes. For each cell type pair (𝑘 1, 𝑘 2), we conduct the t -test for e ach gene , then applied 

the Benjamini –Hochberg (BH) procedure to adjust for multiple testing across all pairwise cell -type 

comparisons and evaluated the resulting false discovery rate (FDR) under two different thresholds ,

0.01 and 0.05 . A lower FDR indicates better performance, as it reflects fewer spurious differential -

expression signals after decontamination. 

Downstream analysis tasks 

Post -clustering and ARI analysis 

To perform cell -type annotation , for each data set, we applied a standard algorithm to form K cell 

clusters, where K is the number of cell types in the cell -type annotation . We checked the consistency 

of these clusters with the authors’ original annotations using Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), where a higher 

value indicates better consistency. We further compared the ARI values with or without applying 

DeLeakage. 

Specifically, we first normalized the raw observed data or the adjusted expression values produced by 

DeLeakage and SPLIT. The normalized values were then transformed to the log scale using  log (𝑥 + 1),

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

and K -means clustering was performed using kmeans() , a basic clustering function in R. For a fair 

comparison, the number of clusters was set to be the same as the number of majority cell types in the 

ground -truth annotations. This strategy provides a simple and consistent framework for evaluating the 

quality of adjusted expressions from diff erent methods. Finally, we calculated the ARI between the K -

means clustering labels and the ground -truth annotations, and used the ARI values to compare the 

performance of different methods. 

Moran’s I spatial auto -correlation analysis 

To study spatially dependent expression, we analyzed spatial auto -correlation of detected transcript 

levels in cells that the genes are not expected to express. If the expression level of a gene in a cell 

correlates with its expression in the nearby cells, auto -correlation is high (i.e., closer to the maximum 

Moran’s I value of 1). For example, if a gene is specifically expressed in cell type X, and cells of this 

cell type tend to cluster spatially, then auto -correlation of this gene across all cells would be high. On 

the other hand, if the cells of cell type X are excluded from the analyses, any detected expression of 

the gene in the remaining cells is just noise if there is no transcript leakage, and thus auto -correlation 

should be close to zero. Yet due to transcript leakage, if these cells are contaminated by transcripts of 

this gene leaked by cells of cell type X, auto -correlation can be high again. Therefore, we expect that 

in the raw data affected by transcript leakage, auto -correlation of genes not expected to be expressed 

is high, but with proper adjustment of the data, auto -correlation of these ge nes will be reduce d.

Specifically, t o determine the ability of DeLeakage in reducing contamination levels of genes across 

different cell types and data sets, we performed spatial auto -correlation analysis using exclusive marker 

genes specific to each cell type. We compared raw count and decontaminated data from both our 

method and SPLIT for MERFISH mouse brain, MERFISH human heart and Xenium mouse brain d ata 

sets. For each annotated cell type per data set, we extracted the subset of cells assigned to that type 

from the expression matrix and their spatial coordinates. The marker -gene expression matrix for that 

cell subset was transposed into a cells -by -genes AnnData object with spatial coordinates stored . We 

constructed a spatial neighbor graph using scanpy.pp.neighbors(n_neighbors=11) ( Scanpy version 

1.11.5), which identifies the 10 nearest Euclidean -distance neighbors per cell. Moran's I was then 

computed for each marker gene using scanpy.metrics.morans_i(adata), which operates on the 

connectivities graph. 

Running time and RAM usage 

For the comparison of runtime and memory usage, we used Intel Xeon Gold 6246R processors at 3.4 

GHz and fixed the number of CPU cores at 24 for both SPLIT and the CPU version of DeLeakage. For 

the GPU version of DeLeakage, we used an AMD Rome 7742 CPU at 3 .4 GHz and an NVIDIA A100 

GPU. For both simulated and real data sets, the total number of iterations was set to twice the burn -in 

period to facilitate convergence. Specifically, we used 1,000 iterations for the simulated data sets and 

10,000 iterations for the real data sets. We implemented real -time monitoring of wall -clock runtime and 

peak memory usage during program execution. Resource metrics, including system memory, GPU 

memory, and process resident memory, were recorded every 10 seconds. At the end of each run, a 

fi nal summary was generated, reporting the total runtime, peak memory usage, and program exit status. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

References 

1. Larsson L, Frisen J, Lundeberg J. Spatially resolved transcriptomics adds a new dimension to 

genomics. Nat Methods. 2021;18(1):15 -8. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -020 -01038 -7. PubMed PMID: 

33408402. 

2. Rao A, Barkley D, Franca GS, Yanai I. Exploring tissue architecture using spatial 

transcriptomics. Nature. 2021;596(7871):211 -20. Epub 20210811. doi: 10.1038/s41586 -021 -

03634 -9. PubMed PMID: 34381231; PMCID: PMC8475179. 

3. Williams CG, Lee HJ, Asatsuma T, Vento -Tormo R, Haque A. An introduction to spatial 

transcriptomics for biomedical research. Genome Med. 2022;14(1):68. Epub 20220627. doi: 

10.1186/s13073 -022 -01075 -1. PubMed PMID: 35761361; PMCID: PMC9238181. 

4. Moses L, Pachter L. Museum of spatial transcriptomics. Nat Methods. 2022;19(5):534 -46. 

Epub 20220310. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -022 -01409 -2. PubMed PMID: 35273392. 

5. Zhuang X. Spatially resolved single -cell genomics and transcriptomics by imaging. Nat 

Methods. 2021;18(1):18 -22. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -020 -01037 -8. PubMed PMID: 33408406; 

PMCID: PMC9805800. 

6. Close JL, Long BR, Zeng H. Spatially resolved transcriptomics in neuroscience. Nat Methods. 

2021;18(1):23 -5. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -020 -01040 -z. PubMed PMID: 33408398. 

7. Cook DP, Jensen KB, Wise K, Roach MJ, Dezem FS, Ryan NK, Zamojski M, Vlachos IS, 

Knott SRV, Butler LM, Wrana JL, Banovich NE, Plummer JT, Martelotto LG. A comparative 

analysis of imaging -based spatial transcriptomics platforms. bioRxiv. 2023. doi: 

10.1101/ 2023.12.13.571385. 

8. Hartman A, Satija R. Comparative analysis of multiplexed in situ gene expression profiling 

technologies. bioRxiv. 2024. Epub 20240124. doi: 10.1101/2024.01.11.575135. PubMed 

PMID: 38260366; PMCID: PMC10802595. 

9. Ren P, Zhang R, Wang Y, Zhang P, Luo C, Wang S, Li X, Zhang Z, Zhao Y, He Y, Zhang H, Li 

Y, Gao Z, Zhang X, Zhao Y, Liu Z, Meng Y, Zhang Z, Zeng Z. Systematic benchmarking of 

high -throughput subcellular spatial transcriptomics platforms across human tumors . Nat 

Commun. 2025;16(1):9232. Epub 20251017. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -025 -64292 -3. PubMed 

PMID: 41107232; PMCID: PMC12534522. 

10. Wang H, Huang R, Nelson J, Gao C, Tran M, Yeaton A, Krishna S, Felt K, Pfaff KL, Bowman 

T, Rodig SJ, Wei K, Goods BA, Farhi SL. Systematic benchmarking of imaging spatial 

transcriptomics platforms in FFPE tissues. Nat Commun. 2025;16(1):10215. Epub 2025112 0. 

doi: 10.1038/s41467 -025 -64990 -y. PubMed PMID: 41266321; PMCID: PMC12635344. 

11. Rahmani E, Schweiger R, Rhead B, Criswell LA, Barcellos LF, Eskin E, Rosset S, 

Sankararaman S, Halperin E. Cell -type -specific resolution epigenetics without the need for cell 

sorting or single -cell biology. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):3417. Epub 20190731. doi: 

10.1038/s41467 -019 -11052 -9. PubMed PMID: 31366909; PMCID: PMC6668473. 

12. Wang X, Park J, Susztak K, Zhang NR, Li M. Bulk tissue cell type deconvolution with multi -

subject single -cell expression reference. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):380. Epub 20190122. doi: 

10.1038/s41467 -018 -08023 -x. PubMed PMID: 30670690; PMCID: PMC6342984. 

13. Li Z, Wu Z, Jin P, Wu H. Dissecting differential signals in high -throughput data from complex 

tissues. Bioinformatics. 2019;35(20):3898 -905. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz196. PubMed 

PMID: 30903684; PMCID: PMC6931351. 

14. Houseman EA, Kile ML, Christiani DC, Ince TA, Kelsey KT, Marsit CJ. Reference -free 

deconvolution of DNA methylation data and mediation by cell composition effects. BMC 

Bioinformatics. 2016;17:259. Epub 20160629. doi: 10.1186/s12859 -016 -1140 -4. PubMed 

PMID: 27358049; PMCID: PMC4928286. 

15. Accomando WP, Wiencke JK, Houseman EA, Nelson HH, Kelsey KT. Quantitative 

reconstruction of leukocyte subsets using DNA methylation. Genome Biol. 2014;15(3):R50. 

Epub 20140305. doi: 10.1186/gb -2014 -15 -3-r50. PubMed PMID: 24598480; PMCID: 

PMC4053693. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

16. Houseman EA, Accomando WP, Koestler DC, Christensen BC, Marsit CJ, Nelson HH, 

Wiencke JK, Kelsey KT. DNA methylation arrays as surrogate measures of cell mixture 

distribution. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012;13:86. Epub 20120508. doi: 10.1186/1471 -2105 -13 -86. 

Pub Med PMID: 22568884; PMCID: PMC3532182. 

17. Song X, Ji J, Wang P. iProMix: A mixture model for studying the function of ACE2 based on 

bulk proteogenomic data. J Am Stat Assoc. 2023;118(541):43 -55. Epub 20221005. doi: 

10.1080/01621459.2022.2110876. PubMed PMID: 37409267; PMCID: PMC10321538. 

18. Song X, Ji J, Rothstein JH, Alexeeff SE, Sakoda LC, Sistig A, Achacoso N, Jorgenson E, 

Whittemore AS, Klein RJ, Habel LA, Wang P, Sieh W. MiXcan: a framework for cell -type -

aware transcriptome -wide association studies with an application to breast cancer. N at 

Commun. 2023;14(1):377. Epub 20230123. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -023 -35888 -4. PubMed 

PMID: 36690614; PMCID: PMC9871010. 

19. Meng G, Pan Y, Tang W, Zhang L, Cui Y, Schumacher FR, Wang M, Wang R, He S, Krischer 

J, Li Q, Feng H. imply: improving cell -type deconvolution accuracy using personalized 

reference profiles. Genome Med. 2024;16(1):65. Epub 20240429. doi: 10.1186/s13073 -024 -

01338 -z. PubMed PMID: 38685057; PMCID: PMC11057104. 

20. Ni Z, Prasad A, Chen S, Halberg RB, Arkin LM, Drolet BA, Newton MA, Kendziorski C. 

SpotClean adjusts for spot swapping in spatial transcriptomics data. Nat Commun. 

2022;13(1):2971. Epub 20220527. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -022 -30587 -y. PubMed PMID: 

35624112; PMCI D: PMC9142522. 

21. Cable DM, Murray E, Zou LS, Goeva A, Macosko EZ, Chen F, Irizarry RA. Robust 

decomposition of cell type mixtures in spatial transcriptomics. Nat Biotechnol. 2022;40(4):517 -

26. Epub 20210218. doi: 10.1038/s41587 -021 -00830 -w. PubMed PMID: 33603203; PMCID: 

PM C8606190. 

22. Li H, Zhou J, Li Z, Chen S, Liao X, Zhang B, Zhang R, Wang Y, Sun S, Gao X. A 

comprehensive benchmarking with practical guidelines for cellular deconvolution of spatial 

transcriptomics. Nat Commun. 2023;14(1):1548. Epub 20230321. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -023 -

37 168 -7. PubMed PMID: 36941264; PMCID: PMC10027878. 

23. Bilous M, Buszta D, Bac J, Kang S, Dong Y, Tissot S, Andre S, Alexandre Gaveta M, Voize C, 

Peters S, Homicsko K, Gottardo R. Resolving sensitivity, specificity and signal contamination 

in Xenium spatial transcriptomics. Nat Methods. 2026. Epub 20260430. do i: 10.1038/s41592 -

026 -03089 -8. PubMed PMID: 42062553. 

24. Rahmani E, Schweiger R, Shenhav L, Wingert T, Hofer I, Gabel E, Eskin E, Halperin E. 

BayesCCE: a Bayesian framework for estimating cell -type composition from DNA methylation 

without the need for methylation reference. Genome Biol. 2018;19(1):141. Epub 2018 0921. 

doi: 10.1186/s13059 -018 -1513 -2. PubMed PMID: 30241486; PMCID: PMC6151042. 

25. Yao Z, van Velthoven CTJ, Kunst M, Zhang M, McMillen D, Lee C, Jung W, Goldy J, Abdelhak 

A, Aitken M, Baker K, Baker P, Barkan E, Bertagnolli D, Bhandiwad A, Bielstein C, 

Bishwakarma P, Campos J, Carey D, Casper T, Chakka AB, Chakrabarty R, Chavan S, Chen 

M, Clark M, Close J, Crichton K, Daniel S, DiValentin P, Dolbeare T, Ellingwood L, Fiabane E, 

Fliss T, Gee J, Gerstenberger J, Glandon A, Gloe J, Gould J, Gray J, Guilford N, Guzman J, 

Hirschstein D, Ho W, Hooper M, Huang M, Hupp M, Jin K, Kroll M, Lathia K, Leon A, Li S, 

Long B, Madigan Z, Malloy J, Malone J, Maltzer Z, Martin N, McCue R, McGinty R, Mei N, 

Melchor J, Meyerdierks E, Mollenkopf T, Moonsman S, Nguyen TN, Otto S, Pham T, Rimorin 

C, Ruiz A, Sanchez R, Sawyer L, Shapovalova N, Shepard N, Slaught erbeck C, Sulc J, Tieu 

M, Torkelson A, Tung H, Valera Cuevas N, Vance S, Wadhwani K, Ward K, Levi B, Farrell C, 

Young R, Staats B, Wang MM, Thompson CL, Mufti S, Pagan CM, Kruse L, Dee N, Sunkin 

SM, Esposito L, Hawrylycz MJ, Waters J, Ng L, Smith K, Tasic B, Zhuang X, Zeng H. A high -

resolution transcriptomic and spatial atlas of cell types in the whole mouse brain. Nature. 

2023;624(7991):317 -32. Epub 20231213. doi: 10.1038/s41586 -023 -06812 -z. PubMed PMID: 

38092916; PMCID: PMC10719114. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

26. Chen KH, Boettiger AN, Moffitt JR, Wang S, Zhuang X. RNA imaging. Spatially resolved, 

highly multiplexed RNA profiling in single cells. Science. 2015;348(6233):aaa6090. Epub 

20150409. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa6090. PubMed PMID: 25858977; PMCID: PMC4662681. 

27. de Ceglia R, Ledonne A, Litvin DG, Lind BL, Carriero G, Latagliata EC, Bindocci E, Di Castro 

MA, Savtchouk I, Vitali I, Ranjak A, Congiu M, Canonica T, Wisden W, Harris K, Mameli M, 

Mercuri N, Telley L, Volterra A. Specialized astrocytes mediate glutamater gic gliotransmission 

in the CNS. Nature. 2023;622(7981):120 -9. Epub 20230906. doi: 10.1038/s41586 -023 -06502 -

w. PubMed PMID: 37674083; PMCID: PMC10550825. 

28. Farah EN, Hu RK, Kern C, Zhang Q, Lu TY, Ma Q, Tran S, Zhang B, Carlin D, Monell A, Blair 

AP, Wang Z, Eschbach J, Li B, Destici E, Ren B, Evans SM, Chen S, Zhu Q, Chi NC. Spatially 

organized cellular communities form the developing human heart. Nature. 

202 4;627(8005):854 -64. Epub 20240313. doi: 10.1038/s41586 -024 -07171 -z. PubMed PMID: 

38480880; PMCID: PMC10972757. 

29. Fu X, Sun L, Dong R, Chen JY, Silakit R, Condon LF, Lin Y, Lin S, Palmiter RD, Gu L. Polony 

gels enable amplifiable DNA stamping and spatial transcriptomics of chronic pain. Cell. 

2022;185(24):4621 -33 e17. Epub 20221110. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.021. Pu bMed PMID: 

36368323; PMCID: PMC9691594. 

30. Song F, Chan GMA, Wei Y. Flexible experimental designs for valid single -cell RNA -

sequencing experiments allowing batch effects correction. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):3274. 

Epub 20200701. doi: 10.1038/s41467 -020 -16905 -2. PubMed PMID: 32612268; PMCID: 

PMC7330047 .

31. Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using 

empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics. 2007;8(1):118 -27. Epub 20060421. doi: 

10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037. PubMed PMID: 16632515. 

32. Wolock SL, Lopez R, Klein AM. Scrublet: Computational Identification of Cell Doublets in 

Single -Cell Transcriptomic Data. Cell Syst. 2019;8(4):281 -91 e9. Epub 20190403. doi: 

10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005. PubMed PMID: 30954476; PMCID: PMC6625319. 

33. Xu C, Lopez R, Mehlman E, Regier J, Jordan MI, Yosef N. Probabilistic harmonization and 

annotation of single -cell transcriptomics data with deep generative models. Mol Syst Biol. 

2021;17(1):e9620. doi: 10.15252/msb.20209620. PubMed PMID: 33491336; PMCID: 

PMC7829634. 

34. Wolf FA, Angerer P, Theis FJ. SCANPY: large -scale single -cell gene expression data analysis. 

Genome Biol. 2018;19(1):15. Epub 20180206. doi: 10.1186/s13059 -017 -1382 -0. PubMed 

PMID: 29409532; PMCID: PMC5802054. 

35. Tepe B, Hill MC, Pekarek BT, Hunt PJ, Martin TJ, Martin JF, Arenkiel BR. Single -Cell RNA -

Seq of Mouse Olfactory Bulb Reveals Cellular Heterogeneity and Activity -Dependent 

Molecular Census of Adult -Born Neurons. Cell Rep. 2018;25(10):2689 -703 e3. doi: 

10.10 16/j.celrep.2018.11.034. PubMed PMID: 30517858; PMCID: PMC6342206. 

36. Petukhov V, Xu RJ, Soldatov RA, Cadinu P, Khodosevich K, Moffitt JR, Kharchenko PV. Cell 

segmentation in imaging -based spatial transcriptomics. Nat Biotechnol. 2022;40(3):345 -54. 

Epub 20211014. doi: 10.1038/s41587 -021 -01044 -w. PubMed PMID: 34650268. 

37. Stringer C, Wang T, Michaelos M, Pachitariu M. Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular 

segmentation. Nat Methods. 2021;18(1):100 -6. Epub 20201214. doi: 10.1038/s41592 -020 -

01018 -x. PubMed PMID: 33318659. 

38. Yakowitz SJ, Spragins JD. On the Identifiability of Finite Mixtures. The Annals of Mathematical 

Statistics. 1968;39(1):209 -14. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177698520. 

39. Gelfand AE. Gibbs Sampling. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 

2012;95(452):1300 -4. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2000.10474335. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

Code availability 

Details on reproducing our analysis and analyzing other data sets are available on GitHub at  https://yip -

lab.github.io/DeLeakage/ . De Leakage is available as a Python package at  https://github.com/Yip -

Lab/DeLeakage . Code to reproduce the analysis and figures are available at  https://github.com/Yip -

Lab/DeLeakage  and  https://github.com/Yip -Lab/DeLeakage -analysis .

Acknowledgements 

CHS, PDA, BR, QZ, and KYY are supported by National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of 

Health under Award Number U54AG079758 . KYY is additionally supported by National Cancer Institute 

of the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers P30CA030199 and R01CA287114, National 

Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01AG085498, National 

Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number 

R21GM159319 , National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health under 

Award Number R21 HL177724, The V Foundation under Award Number V2025 -028, and internal grants 

of Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute. MS and CC are supported by National Cancer 

Institute of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number UH3CA275669. The content is solely 

the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the funding 

agencies. 

Author contributions 

CHS and KYY conceived the study. CHS, YZ, SH -CC, LL , Y W, and KYY performed data analysis. CHS, 

YZ, LL, YW, and KYY were involved in the original design of the DeLeakage, while YZ, LL, and Y W

derived the model details, conducted the statistical inference, developed the parallel computing 

scheme, and implemented the algorithms. YZ and YW proved the model identifiability. CMC, MGT, JF, 

CK, PDA, BR, M JS, and QZ provided ST data. CHS , SH -CC, C MC, MGT, JF, CK, PDA, BR, M JS, QZ, 

YW, and KYY produced biological interpretations. CHS, YZ, YW, and KYY wrote the manuscript. All 

authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. 

Competing interest 

All authors declare no competing interests. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Figure Legends 

Figure 1. Evidence of transcript leakage in spatial transcriptomics data. 

(A) Spatial distribution of excitatory neuron marker Slc17a7 transcripts in non -neuronal cells. 

(B) Spatial density distribution of excitatory neurons overlaid on spatial distribution of non -neuronal 

cells with a high detected level of Slc17a7 . The inner rectangle shows the hippocampal region. 

(C-D) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the MERFISH (C) and scRNA -seq (D) data. 

All results in these and following panels (except Panel s F, M, N, and O ) were produced using data from 

the hippocampal formation region. 

(E) Co -detection of excitatory neuron marker Slc17a7 transcripts and astrocyte marker Aqp4 transcripts 

in individual cells in the MERFISH data. 

(F) Co -detection of transcripts in the MERFISH and scRNA -seq data of gene pairs supposed to have 

mutually exclusive expression in different brain regions. For each gene pair, the Jaccard index is 

defined as the number of cells with both types of transcripts detected divided by the number of cells 

with either detected. Each box -and -whisker plot shows the distribution of Jaccard index across all the 

gene pairs. 

(G) Distribution of endogenous and potential contamination transcripts’ distances from cell center. 

(H) Average detected transcript levels of potential contamination genes in cells at different distances 

from the nearest potential contamination source. The contamination genes shown are Slc17a7 with 

excitatory neurons as potential contamination source (left) and Aqp4 with astrocytes as potential 

contamination source (right). 

(I) Average detected transcript counts of all genes, unexpected genes, or negative control blank probes, 

across all cells. 

(J-L) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the MERFISH data resulted by three 

alternative cell segmentation strategies/methods, including shrinking the cell radius by half for the 

whole cell -body segmentation by CellPose (J), nuclei -only seg mentation by CellPose (K) and Baysor 

segmentation (L). 

(M-N) A n area for illustrating the effects of transcript leakage on the identification of spatially dependent 

gene expression patterns, with all major cell types shown (E) or only Astro -Epen cells (F). 

(O) Cell type markers with significant spatially -dependent expression identified in Astro -Epen cells 

likely caused by transcript leakage. Each row shows the case of one of the cell type markers, with the 

first column showing the spatial distribution of cells of the expected cell type, which serve as the 

potential contamination sources, the second column showing the detected levels of the maker in these 

cells, and the third column showing the detected level of the maker in the Astro -Epen cells. 

Figure 2. Generality of transcript leakage across data produced from different tissues of 

different species on different spatial transcriptomics platforms. 

(A-C) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the spatial transcriptomics data. In the 

human heart MERFISH data set (A), aCM, ncCM, and vCM are all subtypes of cardiomyocytes, while 

BEC, Endocardial, and LEC are all subtypes of endothelial cell s. These subtypes share some common 

markers. Similarly, in the mouse brain Pixel -seq data set, some neuron subtypes share some common 

markers. 

(D-F) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the corresponding dissociative scRNA -

seq/snRNA -seq data. 

(G-I) Co -detection of markers of two different cell types in individual cells in the spatial transcriptomics 

data. 

(J-L) Co -detection of transcripts in the spatial transcriptomics and dissociative scRNA -seq/snRNA -seq 

data of gene pairs supposed to have mutually exclusive expression. For each gene pair, the Jaccard 

index is defined as the number of cells with both types of transcripts detected divided by the number 

of cells with either detected. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

(M-O) Average detected transcript level of a potentially contamination gene in cells at different distance 

from the nearest potential contamination source. 

Figure 3. The DeLeakage method. 

(A) The DeLe akage approach, in which the observed expression level of a gene in a cell is modeled 

as the sum of its actual expression and expression of the gene in neighboring cell diffused to the cell 

according to their distance and gene -specific properties. 

(B) The conventional deconvolution -based denoising approach, in which the observed expression 

profile of a cell is modeled as the mixture of expression profiles of different cell types. 

(C) Illustration of the DeLeakage method. The input includes the spatial location, estimated size, and 

observed expression profile of each cell. The DeLeakage model contains parameters related to size of 

each cell  𝛿 𝑖 , mean expression of each gene in each cell type  𝜇 𝑔𝑘  , latent cell type of each cell Zi,

proportion of cells belonging to each cell type  𝜋 𝑘 , diffusion coefficient of each gene  𝛾 𝑔  , and distance -

dependent decay  𝛽 . These parameters are estimated from the data using a parallel algorithm for both 

the CPU and GPU versions. The output of DeLeakage includes the estimated values of the model 

parameters as well as decontaminated expression profile of each cell. These resu lts can be used for 

various downstream analyses. 

Figure 4. Validation and benchmarking of DeLeakage using simulated data. 

(A) Actual locations of cells in the 5 cell types. 

(B) Actual mean expression level of each gene in each cell type. 

(C) Cell type of each cell inferred by DeLeakage based on the learned values of the latent cell type 

variable s.

(D) Inferred mean expression level of each gene in each cell type by DeLeakage. 

(E) Comparing DeLeakage -inferred and actual contamination parameter values. 

(F-J) Level of one of the marker genes in cell type 1 selected randomly in the initial simulated data 

before transcript leakage (F), final simulated data after transcript leakage (G), the adjusted data after 

applying DeLeakage (H), SPLIT (I), or SpotClean (J). In each panel, the upper plot includes all cells, 

and the lower plot includes only cells not of cell type 1. 

(K-O) Residuals between inferred and actual average expression levels of the randomly selected 

marker gene of each cell type, with the inference performed by DeLeakage, SPLIT, or SpotClean. Each 

panel shows the result of one cell type. 

(P-T) Average cosine similarity between cells from the same cell type or different cell types, based on 

the actual gene expression levels (U), observed levels affected by transcript leakage (V), and inferred 

expression levels by DeLeakage (W), SPLIT (X), or Sp otClean (Y). 

(U-V) False discovery rates of differentially expressed genes between two cell types based on the 

observed transcript levels or the inferred expression levels by DeLeakage, SPLIT, or SpotClean. The 

two panels show results when the Benjamini -Hochberg procedure was used to control the false 

discovery rate at 0.01 (U) or 0.05 (V). 

Figure 5. Improvement of transcript quantification in the mouse brain MERFISH data achieved 

by DeLeakage. 

(A-D) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the scRNA -seq data (A), raw MERFISH 

data (B), or after applying DeLeakage (C) or SPLIT (D). 

(E-H) Spatial distribution of excitatory neurons (E) and transcripts of its marker Slc17a7 in the raw data 

(F), or after applying DeLeakage (G) or SPLIT (H). 

(I-L) Spatial distribution of Astro -Epen cells (I) and transcripts of its marker Aqp4 in the raw data (J), or 

after applying DeLeakage (K) or SPLIT (L). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

(M) Distribution of all genes’ diffusion parameters identified by DeLeakage. 

(N-P) Cosine similarity of average gene expression among cell types, based on the raw data (N), or 

after applying DeLeakage (O), or SPLIT (P). 

(Q-R) Co -detection of transcripts of gene pairs supposed to have mutually exclusive expression before 

and after applying DeLeakage (Q), or SPLIT (R). For each gene pair, the Jaccard index is defined as 

the number of cells with both types of transcripts detecte d divided by the number of cells with either 

detected. 

Figure 6. Improvement of downstream analyses achieved by DeLeakage. 

(A) Consistency between cell clusters and cell -type annotation s, based on clusters produced from raw 

data, DeLeakage -adjusted data, or SPLIT -adjusted data. 

(B) Locations of cells in different cell types (columns) in the mouse brain Xenium data, based on the 

cell -type annotation (first row), clustering of raw data (second row), clustering of DeLeakage -adjusted 

data (third row), or SPLIT -adjusted data (fourth row). 

(C) Spatial auto -correlation of unexpected transcripts in the mouse brain Xenium data, based raw data 

(first column), DeLeakage -adjusted data (second column), or SPLIT -adjusted data (third column). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Supplementary Materials 

Supplementary Results 

Prevalence of transcript leakage across spatial transcriptomics data produced from different tissues, 

species, and experimental platforms 

To study the generality of the transcript leakage problem, we analyzed several additional ST data sets, 

including 1) MERFISH data produced from the human heart 28 , 2) Xenium data produced from the 

mouse brain ( demo data from 10x Genomics) and 3) Pixel -seq data produced from the mouse brain 29 .

Together, these data sets cover data from two tissue types of two species, produced using three ST 

platforms including both imaging -based and sequencing -based methods. In the first two studies, 

scRNA -seq or single -nucleus RNA -sequencing (snRNA -seq) data were also produced from related 

samples. For the Pixel -seq data set, we used published scRNA -seq data of the mouse brain 25 in our 

analyses. Since raw data were not available in all cases, we focused on the analyses that require only 

processed data. 

In all three studies, the original cell -type annotation s of the cells in the ST data were produced by 

combining ST and scRNA -seq data (Supplementary Figure 2A -C). Based on these annotations, in all 

three cases, unexpected transcripts are detected in the ST data, namely transcripts of genes that are 

supposed to be markers of another cell type (Figure 2A -C). In contrast, these unexpected transcripts 

are detected at much lower levels in the corresponding scRNA -seq/snRNA -seq data (Figure 2D -F). 

Again, we confirmed the co -detection of markers of different cell types in individual cells in the ST data 

(Figure 2G -I). Using genes supposed to be expressed in mutually exclusive cells, we found that cells 

in the ST data have much more frequent co -detection than in the scRNA -seq/snRNA -seq data (Figure 

2J -L). We also observed dependency of unexpected transcript level on the distance to the potential 

contamination source (Figure 2M -O). 

Overall, these results show that transcript contamination is a prevalent problem in ST data. 

Compari ng DeLe akage, SPLIT, and SpotClean on simulated data 

We assessed how spatial contamination may affect cell -type annotation by causing cells of different 

cell types to appear artificially more similar to each other. When similarity was computed using the 

actual gene expression levels, cells from the same cell type are generally more similar to each other 

than to cells from oth er cell types (Figure 4P). With transcript leakage in the simulated data, different 

cell types became more similar to each other (Figure 4Q). The true cell type differences were largely 

restored by the expression level adjustments performed by DeLeakage (F igure 4R). In contrast, SPLIT 

could only partially remove the artificial cell -cell similarities caused by transcript leakage (Figure 4S) 

while SpotClean over -corrected by reducing levels of genes that are actually expressed in multiple cell 

types. 

We also performed differential expression analysis between pairs of cell types. In the simulated data, 

class i and class ii genes are truly differentially expressed between some cell type pairs, while class iii 

genes are not. When a gene is not really differential ly expressed between two cell types but is identified 

to have differential expression, that constitutes a false positive call. When we applied differential 

expression analysis directly to the observed data, which is affected by transcript leakage, there wa s a 

very high level of false positives even after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing (Figure 4U -V). 

After applying DeLeakage to remove the contamination, the false positive rate was controlled to the 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

target levels. In comparison, the false positive rate remained high after applying SPLIT or SpotClean 

(Figure 4U -V). 

Application of DeLeakage to the other three real ST data sets 

For the mouse brain Xenium and human heart data sets, DeLeakage was again effective as evidenced 

by the three types of analyses (Supplementary Figures 6 -7). In both cases, DeLeakage achieved much 

better adjustments than SPLIT. For example, after applying D eLeakage to the mouse brain Xenium 

data, the Astro -Epen markers Acsbg1 and Aqp4 became mostly detected in Astro -Epen cells only 

(Supplementary Figure 7C), but after applying SPLIT, these transcripts were still detected in most cells 

in all cell types (Supplementary Figure 7D). For the mouse brain Pixel -seq data, we focused on the 

det ected transcript levels of marker genes. We found that after applying either DeLeakage or SPLIT, 

detected transcript levels of marker genes of unrelated cell types were reduced, but DeLeakage was 

more successful in retaining the levels of marker genes of t he relevant cell types (Supplementary Figure 

8). For example, in granule cells, the level of its marker Meg3 was almost unchanged by DeLeakage, 

but its level was substantially reduced by SPLIT (Supplementary Figure 8A). 

Time and memory efficiency of DeLeakage 

We evaluated the running time and peak RAM usage of DeLeakage. First, using simulated data with 

different simulation settings, we assessed the scalability of DeLeakage with increasing number of cells 

or genes. For both the CPU and GPU versions, both the ru nning time and peak RAM usage scaled 

linearly with both cell number and gene number (Supplementary Figure 10A -D). 

Next, we compared these computational requirements of DeLeakage and SPLIT when they were 

applied to the real data sets. In terms of running time, SPLIT required less time than the CPU version 

of DeLeakage, but the GPU version of DeLeakage required less tim e than SPLIT (Supplementary 

Figure 10E). For example, for the mouse brain MERFISH data set, which contains expression data of 

500 genes in 4 million cells, the GPU version of DeLeakage only took slightly more than an hour to run. 

In terms of peak memory usage, both the CPU and GPU versions of DeLeakage required substantially 

less than SPLIT (Supplementary Figure 10F). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Supplementary Figure Legends 

Supplementary Figure 1. Co -detection of transcripts of gene pairs supposed to have mutually 

exclusive expression. 

Each gene pair is shown separately. For each gene pair, a Jaccard index is computed for cells in each 

brain region, and the box -and -whisker plot shows the distribution of Jaccard Index across all the brain 

regions based on either MERFISH data or scRNA -seq data. 

Supplementary Figure 2. Spatial distribution of cell types in the additional spatial 

transcriptomics data sets. 

(A-C) Spatial distribution of cell types in human heart MERFISH data (A), mouse brain Xenium data 

(B), and mouse brain Pixel -seq data (C). Abbreviations of cell types in the mouse brain Xenium data 

set: Astro -Epen - astrocyte and ependymal cell; Ex - excitator y neuron; In - inhibitory neuron; OPC -

Oligo - oligodendrocyte progenitor cell and oligodendrocyte. Abbreviations of cell types in the human 

heart MERFISH data set: CM - cardiomyocyte; Endo - endothelial cell; Fibro - fibro blast; SMC - smooth 

muscle cell; WBC - white blood cell. Abbreviations of cell types in the mouse brain Pixel -seq data set: 

Astro - astrocyte; ImmunoCells - immune cells; MicroG - microglia; MyOligo - myelinating 

oligodendrocyte; EPL - external plexiform la yer interneuron; GC - granule cell; Neuron.AstroLike -

astrocyte like neuron; Neuron.Immature - immature neuron; Neuron.M.TC - mitral and tufted neuron; 

Neuron.OSN - olfactory sensory neuron; PGC - periglomerular cell (a small inhibitory interneuron 

locate d in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb); Transition - transitional neuron; OEC - olfactory 

ensheathing cell; OPC - oligodendrocyte precursor; EC - endothelial cell; Mes - mesenchymal cell; 

Mural - mural cell; RBCs - red blood cells. 

Supplementary Figure 3. Benchmarking DeLeakage against other ST denoising methods 

based on simulated data (showing all cells). 

(A-T) Level of one of the marker genes in each cell type selected randomly in either the initial simulated 

data before transcript leakage, final simulated data after transcript leakage, the adjusted data after 

applying DeLeakage, SPLIT, or SpotClean. These res ults are shown in different columns, while each 

row shows the results for the marker genes of a different cell type. 

Supplementary Figure 4. Benchmarking DeLeakage against other ST denoising methods 

based on simulated data (excluding cells of the cell type that expresses the marker gene). 

(A-T) Level of one of the marker genes in each cell type selected randomly in either the initial simulated 

data before transcript leakage, final simulated data after transcript leakage, the adjusted data after 

applying DeLeakage, SPLIT, or SpotClean. These res ults are shown in different columns, while each 

row shows the results for the marker genes of a different cell type. 

Supplementary Figure 5. Benchmarking DeLeakage against other ST denoising methods 

based on a subregion in the mouse brain MERFISH data. 

(A) Spatial distribution of cell types. 

(B-E) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in the raw data (B), or after applying 

DeLeakage (C), SPLIT (D), or SpotClean (E). 

(F-J) Spatial distribution of excitatory neurons (F) and transcripts of its marker Slc17a7 in the raw data 

(G), or after applying DeLeakage (H), SPLIT (I) or SpotClean (J). 

(K-O) Spatial distribution of Astro -Epen cells (K) and transcripts of its marker Aqp4 in the raw data (L), 

or after applying DeLeakage (M), SPLIT (N) or SpotClean (O). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

(P-S) Cosine similarity of average gene expression among cell types, based on the raw MERFISH data 

(P), or after applying DeLeakage (Q), SPLIT (R), or SpotClean (S). 

(T-V) Co -detection of transcripts of gene pairs supposed to have mutually exclusive expression before 

and after applying DeLeakage (T), SPLIT (U), or SpotClean (V). For each gene pair, the Jaccard index 

is defined as the number of cells with both types of tran scripts detected divided by the number of cells 

with either detected. 

Supplementary Figure 6. Improvement of transcript quantification in the human heart 

MERFISH data achieved by DeLeakage. 

(A-D) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in scRNA -seq data (A), raw MERFISH data 

(B), or after applying DeLeakage (C), or SPLIT (D). 

(E-H) Spatial distribution of endothelial cells (E) and transcripts of its marker ECE1 in the raw data (F), 

or after applying DeLeakage (G) or SPLIT (H). 

(I-L) Spatial distribution of pericytes (I) and transcripts of its marker PDGFRB in the raw data (J), or 

after applying DeLeakage (K) or SPLIT (L). 

(M) Distribution of all genes’ diffusion parameters identified by DeLeakage. 

(N-P) Cosine similarity of average gene expression among cell types, based on the raw data (N), or 

after applying DeLeakage (O), or SPLIT (P). 

(Q-R) Co -detection of transcripts of gene pairs supposed to have mutually exclusive expression before 

and after applying DeLeakage (Q), or SPLIT (R). For each gene pair, the Jaccard index is defined as 

the number of cells with both types of transcripts detecte d divided by the number of cells with either 

detected. 

Supplementary Figure 7. Improvement of transcript quantification in the mouse brain Xenium 

data achieved by DeLeakage. 

(A-D) Detection of transcripts of cell type -specific genes in scRNA -seq data (A), the raw data (B), or 

after applying DeLeakage (C), or SPLIT (D). 

(E-H) Spatial distribution of excitatory neurons (E) and transcripts of its marker Slc17a7 in the raw data 

(F), or after applying DeLeakage (G) or SPLIT (H). 

(I-L) Spatial distribution of Astro -Epen cells (I) and transcripts of its marker Aqp4 in the raw data (J), or 

after applying DeLeakage (K) or SPLIT (L). 

(M) Distribution of all genes’ diffusion parameters identified by DeLeakage. 

(N-P) Cosine similarity of average gene expression among cell types, based on the raw data (N), or 

after applying DeLeakage (O), or SPLIT (P). 

(Q-R) Co -detection of transcripts of gene pairs supposed to have mutually exclusive expression before 

and after applying DeLeakage (Q), or SPLIT (R). For each gene pair, the Jaccard index is defined as 

the number of cells with both types of transcripts detecte d divided by the number of cells with either 

detected. 

Supplementary Figure 8. Improvement of transcript quantification in the mouse brain Pixel -

seq data achieved by DeLeakage. 

(A-D) Detection of transcripts of genes in granule cells (A), sensory neurons (B), olfactory ensheathing 

cells (C), and mesenchymal cells (D) in the raw data or data adjusted by DeLeakage or SPLIT. For 

each cell type, the canonical markers of that cell type ar e highlighted in red boxes. 

Supplementary Figure 9. Improvement of spatially dependent expression calls achieved by 

DeLeakage. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

(A-B) Spatial auto -correlation of unexpected transcripts in the mouse brain MERFISH data (A) or 

human heart MERFISH data (B), based raw data (first column), DeLeakage -adjusted data (second 

column), or SPLIT -adjusted data (third column). 

Supplementary Figure 10. Running time and peak RAM usage. 

(A-D) Scalability of the CPU (A,B) and GPU (C,D) versions of DeLeakage with respect to increasing 

cell number and 1,000 genes (A,C) or increasing gene number and 10,000 cells (B,D). 

(E-F) Running time (E) and peak RAM usage (F) of the two versions of DeLeakage and SPLIT. For the 

GPU version of DeLeakage, both CPU peak RAM usage and GPU peak VRAM usage are reported. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.13.732076 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mean level of excitatory 

neuron marker Slc17a7 

[0, 20] 

(20, 30] 

(30, 40] 

(40, 50] 

(50, 60] 

Distance to nearest 

excitatory neuron (micron) 

[0, 20] 

(20, 30] 

(30, 40] 

(40, 50] 

(50, 60] 

Distance to nearest 

Astro-Epen cell (micron) 

Mean level of astrocyte 

astrocyte marker Aqp4 

Endogenous Potential contamination 

Mean normalized distance per gene to cell center 

> Counts Counts
> Jaccard index

A C D

E

G H

B

F Brain region Abbreviation 

Olfactory areas OLF 

Cortical subplate CTXsp 

Hippocampus formation HPF 

Isocortex Isocortex 

Striatum STR 

Pallidum PAL 

Hypothalamus HY 

Thalamus TH 

Midbrain MB 

Pons P

Medulla MY 

Cerebellum CB 

# Figure 1 

K

J

I

L N

M

All cell types 

Astro -Epen cells 

Locations of Ex 

O

Locations of In 

Locations of OPC -Oligo 

Slc17a7 level in Ex Slc17a7 level in Astro -Epen 

Slc32a1 level in In Slc32a1 level in Astro -Epen 

Mog level in OPC -Oligo Mog level in Astro -Epen 

Shrunken radius 

Nuclei segmentation 

Baysor [0, 20] 

(20, 30] 

(30, 40] 

(40, 50] 

(50, 60] 

Distance to nearest 

Neuron.M.TC cell (micron) 

Mean level of excitatory neuron 

marker Slc17a7 

Mean level of astrocyte 

marker Aqp4 

[0, 20] 

(20, 30] 

(30, 40] 

(40, 50] 

(50, 60] 

Distance to nearest 

Astro-Epen cell (micron) 

Mean level of endothelial 

marker ECE1 

[0, 20] 

(20, 30] 

(30, 40] 

(40, 50] 

(50, 60] 

Distance to nearest 

endothelial cells (micron) 

CM cardiomyocyte 

aCM atrial CM 

ncCM non-chambered CM 

vCM ventricular CM 

BEC blood endothelial cell 

LEC lymphatic endothelial cell 

Epi epicardial 

Fibro fibroblast 

WBC white blood cell 

SMC smooth muscle cell 

Endo endothelial 

Neuronal neural crest-like 

Mouse brain Pixel -seq 

# Figure 2 

Human heart MERFISH Mouse brain Xenium 

A B C

D E F

J K L

M N O

G IHINPUT 

## Input 

Marker purity 

Spatial analysis 

## Model: DeLeakage 

Expression matrix 

𝒀 = 𝑌 𝑔𝑖 𝐺 ×𝑁 

𝑍 𝑖  (latent) 

Cell -type labels Cell -type proportions 

𝝅 = 𝜋 1, … , 𝜋 𝐾 

෍

> 𝑘 =1
> 𝐾

𝜋 𝑘 = 1

Target cell 

Neighbor cell  Cell size 

Distance 

Cell type 1 

Cell type 2 

Cell type 3 

Spatial information & Cell size 

Spatial location  Neighborhood 

Cell size  𝑉 𝑖 :

(e.g. 2D area /

total counts) 

Cell size factor: 

𝛿 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖  

> 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛 (𝑉 𝑖 )

## Downstream 

Cell -type analysis 

# ∑

𝒀 𝒈𝒊  𝜹 𝒊  𝝁 𝒈𝒌  𝒁 𝒊  𝜸 𝒈  𝒆 −𝜷𝒅 𝒊𝒋  𝜹 𝒋  𝝁 𝒈𝒌  𝒁 𝒋 

Endogenous 

from cell  𝒊  Contamination from neighbors 

Observed 

Latent cell type label update 

via Markov blanket 

Layer 1 

## Parallel Computation 

Layer 3,…,M 

Scalar multiplication 

Matrix multiplication 

Element multiplication 

Gene -specific variance 

𝜎 𝑔 

> 2
> Gene

𝑒 −𝛽𝑑 

Distance  𝑑 

Distance decay parameter 

𝛾 𝑔 ∈ [0,1]

Gene -specific 

contamination parameter 

> Gene
> Gene

Cell types 

Cell -type means 

𝜇 𝑔𝑘 

Output 

Observed  Contamination from neighbors 

Decontaminated expressions 

Layer 2 

Tail list 

(Layer M+1) 

CPU and GPU Implementations 

Gene -specific parameter update 

gene 1 

gene G 

> …
> expressions
> low
> high
> Spatial 2
> Spatial 1
> Gene

Cell   

> 𝒋 ∈𝑵𝒆𝒊 (𝒊 )

Bubble plots 

Clustering  Cosine similarity 

Jaccard index   

> 𝒋 ∈𝑵𝒆𝒊 (𝒊 )

𝝅 𝒊 𝟏  𝝅 𝒊𝟐  𝝅 𝒊𝟑 𝒀 𝒊  𝝁 𝟏  𝝁 𝟐  𝝁 𝟑 

nvolution 

Observed expression of 

a cell 

# Figure 3 

B

Deconvolution 

Observed expression 

of a cell 

DeLeakage: 

contamination as 

distance -dependent 

gene -specific 

diffusion 

Observed expression 

of a cell 

Actual expression 

of the cell 

Diffusion from other cells A

C

e-specific 

amination 

𝝁 𝟑 

Observed expression of 

a cell 

𝝁 𝟏 𝒀 𝒊  𝝁 𝟏  𝝁 𝟐  𝝁 𝟐  𝝁 𝟑 

Actual expression 

of the cell  Diffusion from other cells −10   

> −5
> 0
> 5
> 10
> DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean
> Residuals

Type 5   

> −10
> −5
> 0
> 5
> 10
> DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean
> Residuals

Type 4   

> −4
> 0
> 4
> DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean
> Residuals

Type 3   

> −5
> 0
> 5
> DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean
> Residuals

Type 2   

> −10
> −5
> 0
> 5
> 10
> DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean
> Residuals

Type 1             

> 0.125
> 0.150
> 0.175
> 0.200
> 0.225
> 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200
> True gamma
> Estimated gamma
> type 1 type 2 type 3 type 4 type 5
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> gene  values
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> type 1 type 2 type 3 type 4 type 5
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> gene  values
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8

# Figure 4 

True expression Observed data DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean 

Pair Observed DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean 

1-2 0.167 0.000 0.255 0.155 

1-3 0.282 0.000 0.396 0.209 

1-4 0.009 0.000 0.118 0.000 

1-5 0.000 0.000 0.098 0.000 

2-3 0.561 0.000 0.498 0.527 

2-4 0.034 0.007 0.028 0.014 

2-5 0.272 0.009 0.443 0.209 

3-4 0.143 0.000 0.503 0.159 

3-5 0.318 0.000 0.450 0.351 

4-5 0.026 0.000 0.444 0.000 

Pair Observed DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean 

1-2 0.437 0.016 0.205 0.437 

1-3 0.369 0.008 0.500 0.356 

1-4 0.045 0.019 0.483 0.009 

1-5 0.009 0.009 0.421 0.000 

2-3 0.573 0.009 0.580 0.568 

2-4 0.119 0.007 0.431 0.108 

2-5 0.486 0.027 0.560 0.353 

3-4 0.438 0.032 0.577 0.302 

3-5 0.348 0.008 0.520 0.391 

4-5 0.202 0.000 0.013 0.051 

FDR=0.01 FDR=0.05 

True expression Observed data DeLeakage SPLIT SpotClean 

> All cells Non -cell type 1 cells

A B C D E

F G H I J

K L M N O

P Q R S T

U VFigure 5 

E F G H

I J K L

M N O P

A B C DRaw data DeLeakage SPLIT scRNA -seq 

Q R0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 

> MERFISH Mouse Brain
> MERFISH Human Heart
> Xenium Mouse Brain
> Pixel −seq Mouse Brain

ARI 

Methods 

Raw 

DeLeakage 

SPLIT 

# Figure 6 

> Original
> annotation
> Clusters of raw
> data
> Clusters of
> adjusted data by
> DeLeakage
> Clusters of
> adjusted data by
> SPLIT

Astro -Epen Ex Immune In OPC -Oligo Vascular 

C Raw data DeLeakage SPLIT 

A

BSupplementary Figure 1 

> Jaccard index

# Supplementary Figure 2 

A B C

Human heart MERFISH Mouse brain Xenium Mouse brain Pixel -seq Supplementary Figure 3                 

> ABCDE
> FGHIJ
> KLMNO
> PQRST

# Supplementary Figure 4                 

> ABCDE
> FGHIJ
> KLMNO
> PQRST

# Supplementary Figure 5 

> Raw data  DeLeakage  SPLIT  SpotClean Cell types
> F G H I
> K L M N
> A B C D
> J
> O
> E
> T U V
> P Q R S

# Supplementary Figure 6 

E F G H

I J K L

M N O P

A B C DRaw data DeLeakage SPLIT scRNA -seq 

RQSupplementary Figure 7 

E F G H

I J K L

M N O P

A B C DRaw data DeLeakage SPLIT scRNA -seq 

RQSupplementary Figure 8 

B

C D

ADetected transcript level 

> in granule cells
> Detected transcript level
> in sensory neurons
> Detected transcript level
> in OECs
> Detected transcript level
> in mesenchymal cells

# Supplementary Figure 9 

Raw data DeLeakage SPLIT 

Raw data DeLeakage SPLIT 

A

B0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

0 5000 10000 15000 20000 

Gene number 

> Computing time (h)
> RAM usage (GB)

Variable Computing time RAM 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.4 

0.8 

1.2 

1.6 

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 

Cell number 

> Computing time (h)
> RAM usage (GB)

Variable Computing time RAM 

0

1

2

3

4

5

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

0 5000 10000 15000 20000 

Gene number 

> Computing time (h)
> RAM usage (GB)

Variable Computing time RAM 

0

1

2

3

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 

Cell number 

> Computing time (h)
> RAM usage (GB)

Variable Computing time RAM 

# Supplementary Figure 10 

Time Mouse brain MERFISH Human Heart MERFISH Mouse brain Xenuim Mouse brain Pixel -seq 

DeLeakage (CPU) 31.70 h 0.95 h 6.18 h 1.29 h 

DeLeakage (GPU) 1.17 h 0.12 h 0.35 h 0.31 h 

SPLIT (CPU) 6.55 h 0.37 h 0.38 h 1.01 h 

Peak RAM Mouse brain MERFISH Human Heart MERFISH Mouse brain Xenuim Mouse brain Pixel -seq 

DeLeakage (CPU) 0.713 GB 0.231 GB 0.273 GB 0.433 GB 

DeLeakage (GPU) CPU 0.696 GB 

GPU 1.250 GB 

CPU 0.222 GB 

GPU 0.689 GB 

CPU 0.241 GB 

GPU 0.741 GB 

CPU 0.329 GB 

GPU 0.777 GB 

SPLIT (CPU) 10.270 GB 1.650 GB 9.010 GB 1.730 GB 

A

C

B

E

D

F

CPU version 

GPU version